     Bloom’s
GUIDES
  J.R.R. Tolkien’s
The Hobbit
                 CURRENTLY AVAILABLE

The Adventures of Huckleberry    The Iliad
   Finn                          Invisible Man
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer     Jane Eyre
All Quiet on the Western Front   The Joy Luck Club
Animal Farm                      The Kite Runner
The Autobiography of Malcolm X   Lord of the Flies
The Awakening                    Macbeth
The Bell Jar                     Maggie: A Girl of the Streets
Beloved                          The Metamorphosis
Beowulf                          Native Son
Black Boy                        Night
The Bluest Eye                   1984
Brave New World                  The Odyssey
The Canterbury Tales             Oedipus Rex
Catch-22                         Of Mice and Men
The Catcher in the Rye           One Hundred Years of Solitude
The Chosen                       Pride and Prejudice
A Christmas Carol                Ragtime
The Crucible                     A Raisin in the Sun
Cry, the Beloved Country         The Red Badge of Courage
Death of a Salesman              The Road
Fahrenheit 451                   Romeo and Juliet
A Farewell to Arms               The Scarlet Letter
Frankenstein                     A Separate Peace
The Glass Menagerie              Slaughterhouse-Five
The Grapes of Wrath              The Stranger
Great Expectations               A Streetcar Named Desire
The Great Gatsby                 The Sun Also Rises
The Handmaid’s Tale              A Tale of Two Cities
Heart of Darkness                Their Eyes Were Watching God
The Hobbit                       To Kill a Mockingbird
The House on Mango Street        Uncle Tom’s Cabin
I Know Why the Caged Bird        The Waste Land
   Sings                         Wuthering Heights
                Bloom’s
    GUIDES
              J.R.R. Tolkien’s
         The Hobbit




Edited & with an Introduction
            by Harold Bloom
Bloom’s Guides: The Hobbit
Copyright © 2011 by Infobase Learning
Introduction © 2011 by Harold Bloom
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems,
without permission in writing from the publisher. For information contact:
Bloom’s Literary Criticism
An imprint of Infobase Learning
132 West 31st Street
New York, NY 10001

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
  J.R.R. Tolkien’s The hobbit / edited and with an introduction by
Harold Bloom.
    p. cm. — (Bloom’s guides)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-61753-003-6 (hardcover)
  ISBN 978-1-4381-3862-6 (e-book)
  1. Tolkien, J. R. R. (John Ronald Reuel), 1892–1973. Hobbit.
  2. Middle Earth (Imaginary place) I. Bloom, Harold. II. Title:
Tolkien’s The hobbit. III. Title: Hobbit.
  PR6039.O32H6333 2011
  823'.912—dc22
                                     2011017010

Bloom’s Literary Criticism books are available at special discounts when
purchased in bulk quantities for businesses, associations, institutions, or
sales promotions. Please call our Special Sales Department in New York
at (212) 967–8800 or (800) 322–8755.

You can find Bloom’s Literary Criticism on the World Wide Web at
http://www.infobaselearning.com

Contributing editor: Portia Williams Weiskel
Cover designed by Takeshi Takahashi
Composition by IBT Global, Troy NY
Cover printed by Yurchak Printing, Landisville PA
Book printed and bound by Yurchak Printing, Landisville PA
Date printed: September 2011
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
All links and Web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at
the time of publication. Because of the dynamic nature of the Web, some
addresses and links may have changed since publication and may no
longer be valid.
                                                     Contents
Introduction                                                7
Biographical Sketch                                         9
The Story Behind the Story                                 11
List of Characters                                         13
Summary and Analysis                                       17
Critical Views                                             44
   Katharyn W. Crabbe on the Quest as Fairy Tale           44
   Brian Rosebury on the Novel as a Transitional
      Work in Tolkien’s Development                        48
   Humphrey Carpenter on Bilbo Baggins                     54
   Perry C. Bramlett on The Hobbit
      as Children’s Literature                             63
   Colin Duriez on Physical and Spiritual Journeys         69
   Tom Shippey on Sources, Origins,
      and Modernizing the Past                             73
   Jaume Albero Poveda on Narrative
      Models in Tolkien’s Fiction                          78
   K.S. Whetter and R. Andrew McDonald
       on Sword Imagery                                    82
   Elizabeth A. Whittingham on the
      Influence of Family on Tolkien                       85
Works by J.R.R. Tolkien                                    91
Annotated Bibliography                                     92
Contributors                                               97
Acknowledgments                                            99
Index                                                     101
       Introduction

                                              HAROLD BLOOM

I continue to prefer The Hobbit to The Lord of the Rings but
acknowledge that I represent only a minority of current
readers. Tolkien’s epic fantasy is moralistic, and its neobiblical
style is pretentious and inflated. Perhaps because it began as a
fairy tale for children, The Hobbit is rather more refreshing.
   Whether even The Hobbit is other than a period piece is
questionable. Read it side by side with John Crowley’s Little,
Big and you will find The Hobbit vanishing away! The same fate
attends Tolkien’s epic when juxtaposed with Philip Pullman’s
His Dark Materials. My own canonical prophecy, founded on
a long lifetime of literary study, has to be melancholy. Like his
imitator, the Harry Potter saga, Tolkien will not be read a gen-
eration or two hence.
   Attempt to reread Rider Haggard’s She or King Solomon’s
Mines. Like Tolkien’s books, they are more vivid as movies and
fade on the page. Haggard is Tolkien’s authentic precursor; his
Allan Quartermain is a palpable model for Bilbo Baggins.
   Contributors to this guide do damage to The Hobbit when
they invoke Lewis Carroll’s Alice books or Kenneth Grahame’s
The Wind in the Willows. Comparisons to Robert Louis Steven-
son’s Kidnapped and Treasure Island are equally destructive to
Tolkien.
   For more than a half century, I have been chided as provoca-
tive and controversial merely because I go on insisting that,
without aesthetic and cognitive standards, imaginative litera-
ture will perish, and something in us also will wane.
   Thinking depends on memory. Fashion passes, and the
libraries are replete with forgotten bestsellers. The function of
criticism, particularly in the digital age, is to teach us to prefer
more difficult pleasures than those so easy that they weaken
our minds.


                                                                  7
       Biographical Sketch
John Ronald Reuel Tolkien was born on January 3, 1892, to
Arthur and Mabel Tolkien, in Bloemfontein, South Africa.
Although his parents were British citizens, Tolkien’s father had
moved to South Africa to work in banking because the dia-
monds, gold, and other precious metals that were being mined
in the Dutch colony were creating a boom economy. Two years
later, Tolkien’s younger brother, Hilary, was born. Tolkien’s
childhood was generally unhappy, his father dying in 1896
and his mother returning to England. The family moved con-
tinually between the working-class villages around Birmingham,
until his mother died in 1904. The boys were then shuffled
around between various relatives, until Tolkien settled in at King
Edward’s School, with custody given to Father Francis Morgan.
   At King Edward’s, Tolkien discovered his passion for lan-
guages, especially languages regarded as “dead.” He also dis-
covered Beowulf and the field of philology, both of which
remained lifelong loves. In 1910, he entered Exeter College,
Oxford, where he deepened his studies of language and pre-
modern texts. He also formed two of the social bonds he would
maintain throughout his life. First, he fell in love with Edith
Bratt, who, after a long and difficult courtship, he would marry
in 1916. Second, he found himself at home in the active club
and society life at college, so much so that he and a circle of
literary- and language-minded colleagues formed their own
club, the Tea Club Bavarian Society, which was dedicated to
a mythical, if not romantic, manner of relating to the world.
Even after most of the members of the TCBS were killed in
World War I, Tolkien retained the beliefs upheld by the TCBS,
and he continued to feel the need for membership in social
clubs and circles throughout his life, eventually forming sev-
eral groups of his own, including the famous Inklings, which
included C.S. Lewis.
   In 1915, Tolkien, like much of his generation, joined the
military to fight for England and the Allies against Germany
and Turkey in World War I. He fought at the Battle of the

                                                                9
Somme as a signaling officer. While there he contracted trench
fever, a disease transmitted by lice, and was eventually sent to
recover in a hospital in England. During this time, Tolkien
began for the first time earnestly working at creating the
mythology of Middle-earth, as he began crafting the languages
of Middle-earth and writing the earliest forms of the stories
that would make up The Silmarillion.
    After the war ended in 1918, Tolkien spent time working
on the New English Dictionary and teaching. He eventu-
ally secured a professorship at Leeds College. While there,
he helped produce a new edition of Sir Gawain and the Green
Knight, which enabled him to land the job he retained for the
rest of his professional career, professor of Anglo-Saxon at
Oxford. While at Oxford, he formed a lifelong friendship with
the writer C.S. Lewis and began working on The Hobbit, at first
as a tale for his own children; it was eventually published in
1937. (See “The Story Behind the Story,” p. 11).
    The Hobbit proved to be a bestseller, and under pressure
to produce a sequel to it, Tolkien began writing again. His
attempt to write a sequel to The Hobbit turned into The Lord
of the Rings, which was eventually published in 1954–55. The
trilogy became one of the bestselling book series in history and
launched a worldwide following. In 1972, his wife, Edith, died,
and two years later, on September 2, 1973, Tolkien died at the
age of 81. Tolkien’s youngest son, Christopher, has continued
to edit and publish Tolkien’s many manuscripts and notes,
including The Silmarillion and The Book of Lost Tales.




10
       The Story Behind the Story
Coincidentally, the story of the origin of The Hobbit seems
itself like a fairy tale. One summer night in 1928, as Tolkien
was grading a mountain of school certificate exam papers, a
dull and mentally wearying task, he found himself staring at an
exam booklet, daydreaming. As Tolkien recalled, “One of the
candidates had mercifully left one of the pages with no writing
on it, (which is the best thing that can possibly happen to an
examiner), and I wrote on it: In a hole in the ground there lived
a hobbit. Names always generate a story in my mind. Eventu-
ally I thought I’d better find out what hobbits were like. But
that’s only the beginning” (Carpenter 175).
   Reflecting back, Tolkien never identified one source for the
name he eventually settled on, Bilbo Baggins, although he did see
parallels between his character and Sinclair Lewis’s Babbit. But he
also saw a lot of himself in his creation: “I am in fact a Hobbit, in
all but size. I like gardens, trees, and unmechanized farmlands;
I smoke a pipe and like good plain food” (Carpenter 179). The
name for Bilbo’s hole, Bag End, Tolkien took from the nickname
for his aunt’s farm. Likewise, Tolkien sensed a similarity to Eng-
lish country folk in his creation, remarking: “The Hobbits are
just rustic English people, made small in size because it reflects
the generally small reach of their imagination, not the small reach
of their courage or latent power” (Carpenter 180).
   Some Tolkien scholars suggest that Gandalf’s image, if not
his name, came from a postcard of a bearded man in a broad
brimmed hat standing in front of the Alps (Carpenter 51).
Tolkien began by giving one of the dwarves the name Gandalf
and the wizard character the name Bladorthin, but he thought
Gandalf sounded more like the name of a magical being, so he
changed it. Other interesting name evolutions include Medwed
the Werebear being altered to Beorn and Pryftan the dragon
becoming Smaug the dragon.
   The narrative was worked on intermittingly over the years
1930–36. At first, Tolkien did not conceive of the story as any-
thing other than a way to entertain his children, and he read

                                                                  11
them chapters and scenes from handwritten notes. While the
tale continued to grow, it remained a diversion solely intended
for his children. The manuscript did not have an ending when
the first readers other than his children became involved in the
project. Tolkien had developed a friendship with author C.S.
Lewis at meetings of a literary club called the Coalbitters. The
Coalbitters studied Old Icelandic literature, always a favorite
of Tolkien’s. Their friendship grew stronger, and they formed
another literary club in 1933 called the Inklings. The Inklings
met twice a week, one night for social discourse and the second
for reading and commenting on members’ creative and academic
writing. At the urging of C.S Lewis and other members of the
Inklings, Tolkien typed and polished his manuscript. Likewise,
poet W.H. Auden was one of Tolkien’s students at Oxford and
was an enthusiastic supporter of The Hobbit.
    Eventually, the manuscript fell into the hands of Elaine
Griffiths, a former student of Tolkien’s, who was working at the
publishing house of Allen and Unwin. Griffiths and another firm
employee, Susan Dagnall, read the manuscript and urged Tolkien
to finish it and revise it for submission, which he diligently com-
pleted. The manuscript was then submitted to Stanley Unwin.
Since The Hobbit was conceived as a children’s tale, Unwin gave
it to his ten-year-old son to read. His son thoroughly enjoyed the
book, and it was accepted for publication. The Hobbit was pub-
lished on September 21, 1937; the text included several of Tolk-
ien’s own illustrations. It was well received, both critically and by
readers, and the first edition sold out. Critics hailed The Hobbit as
a new classic of children’s literature.
    In 1951, Tolkien revised The Hobbit to bring the book into
better alignment with his mythology as he was developing
Middle-earth in his manuscripts and notes for The Lord of the
Rings. He increased the importance of the necromancer char-
acter and made the most substantial changes to the chapter
“Riddles in the Dark.” In the original version, Gollum is not
as twisted a figure, and the riddle game ends with Gollum
offering to give the ring to Bilbo and lead him out of the cave.
However, when Tolkien decided that the ring was the One
True Ring, he altered the story to the version that exists today.

12
       List of Characters
Bilbo Baggins, a good-natured hobbit, is the main protagonist of
the novel. He prizes home and hearth and, like all hobbits, loves
food and drink. He is hired as the burglar for the adventure and
fulfills his tasks with a mix of courage, luck, and practical advice.
Bilbo’s finding of the ring of invisibility under the Misty Moun-
tains serves as the principal point of departure for the narrative of
The Lord of the Rings, in which he is also an important character.

Gandalf is a wizard and also a central character in The Lord of
the Rings. While Gandalf is not depicted as powerfully as he
is in LOTR, he is still perhaps the strongest character in The
Hobbit. He is witty and wise, is a master of pyrotechnics and
smoke rings, and is generally capable of getting the group out
of trouble, either through his counsel or his wizardry.

The Dwarves
For the most part, the dwarves in Thorin’s party are minor
characters in the story, and several do not have any dialogue
at all. Those dwarves that play a more significant role in the
story are discussed here. General dwarven characteristics, such
as stubbornness, a ravenous appetite for food and drink, and
a love of gold, can be attributed to each of these members of
Thorin’s retinue.

Thorin Oakenshield is next in line to be named King under
the Mountain. Thorin is a proud, valiant dwarf of noble blood.
Generally good-natured if longwinded, he is still prone to the
treasure lust that can overcome a dwarf and make him mistreat
his friends. Thorin is particularly taken by the Arkenstone.

Balin, over the course of the journey, develops a deep respect
and friendship for Bilbo.

Bombur is most notable for being the fattest of the dwarves,
and his weight is used to generate humorous situations in the

                                                                  13
text. He also tends to have the worst luck of all the dwarves, as
he tends to fall victim to the dangers of the journey more than
any other character. Bombur, for example, falls into the river in
Mirkwood that has been enchanted to cause anyone who drinks
from or swims in it to fall into a deep, forgetful sleep.

Select “Good” Characters
Master of Rivendale and one of the great leaders of the elves,
Elrond is one of the wisest characters in Middle-earth and
through his advice is a constant force for good. He plays
a major role in The Lord of the Rings. Elrond, although an
immortal elf, has human blood and generally cares about all the
peoples of Middle-earth.

A stern but just leader, the wood elf king rules over the wood
elves of Mirkwood.

Described as having a grim voice, Bard is a natural warrior
who worries that the return of the dwarves will mean a return
of the dragon. He proves to be a warrior of great courage
and fortitude, as he remains at his post in Lake-town when
the dragon attacks. He kills Smaug and is eventually declared
leader of the lake men.

Described as “very strong and he is a skin changer,” Beorn
can transform from a human into a bear. He has a great hatred
for goblins and is generally neutral toward the other people of
Middle-earth. He cares a great deal for the land and for ani-
mals, however, and acts as a guardian over the natural world
around his log cabin. He aids the party before they cross Mirk-
wood and later proves to be of assistance at the Battle of Five
Armies.

Dain of the Iron Hills is Thorin’s cousin and leader of the
dwarves of the Iron Hills.

The Lord of the Eagles had “eyes that could look at the sun
unblinking and could see a rabbit moving on the ground a mile

14
below”(114). The eagles rule the skies of Middle-earth, and
from time to time they intervene on behalf of good characters,
rescuing them or attacking their enemies. In The Hobbit, the
Lord of the Eagles develops a deep friendship with Gandalf
and remains his ally throughout The Lord of the Rings.

The Thrush are an ancient and noble race of birds that lived
in harmony with the dwarves and the men of the Lonely
Mountain and surrounding area before the arrival of the
dragon. A thrush plays a very important role in the story,
helping Bilbo find a secret door and helping Bard aim for the
dragon’s one weak spot. Thrushes can speak with men and
dwarves.

The Ravens are, like the thrushes, an old race of birds allied
with the dwarves and men of the area around the Lonely
Mountain. They can communicate with men and dwarves.

Select “Evil” Characters
Smaug is the great dragon or wyrm. Many years before the
action related in The Hobbit begins, Smaug attacked the Lonely
Mountain and surrounding areas, killing all the men and
dwarves who lived there. He captured the Lonely Mountain
and all its vast treasures and turned the mountain into his lair.
He sleeps on a giant pile of treasure. A vastly powerful and
dangerous monster, he has but one weakness: an unarmored
spot on his belly.

Gollum lives far beneath the Misty Mountains. He once
owned the ring Bilbo finds, calling it his precious. Gollum is a
treacherous, evil-minded creature whose main preoccupation is
sneaking up on people (and goblins) and eating them. Gollum
plans to eat Bilbo after they play the riddle game. The text
hints at Gollum’s history, which will be fully detailed in The
Lord of the Rings.

Sometimes called orcs, goblins are an evil race of mon-
sters that inhabit all the dark and dangerous locations in

                                                              15
Middle-earth. They are first encountered in The Hobbit in the
tunnels and caves of the Misty Mountains. By riding wargs,
they are able to roam the countryside, killing and marauding
wherever they go. An army of goblins takes part in the Battle
of Five Armies, and goblins figure prominently in The Lord of
the Rings.

Evil, wolflike creatures, large and bloodthirsty, wargs align
themselves with goblins in order to more efficiently terrorize
the people of Middle-Earth.

Tom, William, and Bill are trolls, huge, ugly monsters with
evil dispositions and a taste for humans, dwarves, and hobbits.
Extremely strong and extremely unintelligent, trolls cannot
come out during the day, as sunlight turns them to stone.

In The Hobbit, spiders live in Mirkwood, preying on victims
who lose their way in the forest. These spiders are very large
(bigger than Bilbo), can speak, and have an evil disposition.
They particularly hate to be called names.

The Necromancer is a character who remains offstage and
in the background of The Hobbit yet is reported to be a source
of much of the evil in the story. He seems to be as powerful
as Elrond or Gandalf, and Gandalf disappears from the story
temporarily to attempt to thwart the Necromancer. The Nec-
romancer will play a far larger role in The Lord of the Rings.

Head merchant and leader of the men of Lake-town when the
dwarves arrive there, the Master of Dale is not evil in the
goblin sense, but he is a base character. He is selfish, sneaky,
and double faced and thinks only of his own power and wealth.




16
       Summary and Analysis

               Chapter One: An Unexpected Party
The opening lines of The Hobbit are well known both for estab-
lishing the fantasy world where the narrative will take place
and for introducing the reader to one of the principal inhabit-
ants of that world, hobbits: “In a hole in the ground there lived
a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty wet hole, filled with the ends of
worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry, bare sandy hole with
nothing in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a hobbit-hole, and
that means comfort.” (3) Works of fantasy need to establish
that the story takes place in a setting different from the world
of everyday reality, where things can be quite different from
they are in normal reality. Tolkien does this by introducing the
world of hobbits and hobbit holes. He clearly shows that these
hobbit holes are not like the holes some creatures inhabit in
reality; rather, they are special, almost magical holes, in which
special, almost magical creatures live. As Tolkien continues to
describe the comfortable, cozy, hobbit hole, the reader also
learns about hobbits, most notably that they especially enjoy
eating. Hobbits “are little people, about half our height, and
smaller than the bearded dwarves.” (4) Note that Tolkien has
introduced other facts about this fantasy world: It is inhab-
ited by hobbits and people but also by other creatures such as
dwarfs. Tolkien then notes that this particular hole belongs to
the main protagonist of the narrative, Bilbo Baggins, and he
proceeds to describe Bilbo’s genealogy. In doing so, the author
also fills in further background on hobbits and the setting of
the story. Unfortunately for Bilbo, his quiet, comfortable life in
his warm, well-stocked hobbit hole is about to change, as one
morning, Gandalf the wizard appears at his front door.
   The scene already introduces one of the major themes of
The Hobbit, the importance of change, or of the necessity of
leaving the security of home in order to experience the world
on an adventure or journey. The importance of this theme
can be noted in the subtitle of the book, The Hobbit, or There

                                                               17
and Back Again. This theme is revisited repeatedly in the story.
When reading The Hobbit, note the development of the various
characters in response to the changing environment and chal-
lenges of the story.
    The initial humorous interchange between Gandalf and
Bilbo establishes that Bilbo has never really left his immediate
environs and knows little of the world beyond the Hill where
he lives. Gandalf is about to change that fact, as Bilbo invites
the visitor to tea. Little does Bilbo know that Gandalf is going
to invite a party of 13 dwarves to the party as well, with the
intention of having Bilbo join them on an adventure. The
scene reveals Gandalf as a master of psychology, as he knows
that Bilbo would never consciously decide to undertake such an
adventure, no matter how tempted he might be, in part. Gan-
dalf tricks Bilbo into going along, simply by telling the dwarves
that Bilbo is going and by never giving Bilbo the opportunity
to say no.
    After a large meal, Gandalf and the assembled dwarves
inform Bilbo of their plans. One of the dwarves, Thorin Oak-
enshield, is in fact a dwarf prince. His grandfather, Thror, was
the last King under the Mountain and ruled a noble kingdom
filled with jewels, gold, and other wondrous treasures. Unfor-
tunately, the legendary wealth of Thror was his kingdom’s
undoing, as Thorin informs, “undoubtedly that was what
brought the dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know,
from men and elves and dwarves where ever they can find
them; and they guard their plunder as long as they live (which
is practically forever, unless they are killed).” (27) Smaug the
dragon destroyed the kingdom, killing many dwarves and
men, and took Lonely Mountain as his lair. Thorin’s plan, with
the help of a map procured by Gandalf, is for the party of 13
dwarves and one hobbit to journey to the Lonely Mountain to
take revenge on Smaug the dragon.

                Chapter Two: Roast Mutton
Bilbo and the dwarves begin their journey, traveling through
what, to Bilbo at least, are wild and unknown lands. After
several weeks of travel, with Bilbo noticing how infrequent

18
meals and snacks are on an adventure, the party makes camp
in a wooded area. While setting up camp, the dwarves notice
another fire farther in the woods and send Bilbo to investi-
gate. Bilbo sneaks up to the second campfire only to discover
a group of trolls gathered there. The encounter with the trolls
is the first dangerous obstacle of the journey and the first time
the reader gets to see Bilbo in action.
    At first it seems as if Bilbo’s inexperience and comfort-loving
ways are no match for the rigors and dangers of an adventure.
He attempts to pick one of the troll’s pockets, only to be easily
caught. The dwarves come along to see what happened to Bilbo
and fall into the trolls’ trap. The trolls put all the dwarves in
sacks and begin debating among themselves how best to eat
them. This event marks the first time Gandalf will save the party
from trouble. While the trolls are debating one another, Gandalf
sneaks up and begins imitating the voice of each troll, which
causes them to start bickering. The trolls, as a result of Gandalf ’s
instigating, become so consumed in arguing with one another
that they forget about the approach of dawn. As the sun emerges,
Gandalf steps forward, and the trolls are turned to stone.
    As the party collects itself, Bilbo finds a key that leads the
party to the trolls’ treasure. The treasure, which pales in com-
parison to the dragon’s treasure, is still notable as three magic,
elvish swords are found: Sting by Bilbo, Glamdring by Gandalf,
and Orcrist by Thorin. These magic blades go on to play an
important role in The Hobbit and make notable contributions in
The Lord of the Rings. Additionally, the encounter with the trolls
serves as a model for much of the action of the rest of the story,
as the dwarves continually get themselves into trouble that
either Bilbo or Gandalf must rescue them from.

                  Chapter Three: A Short Rest
Chapter three details the group’s visit to Rivendale, home of
elf-lord Elrond, and is most notable for introducing the reader
to the culture of the nature-loving elves. Elves are immortal,
generally good-natured denizens of Middle-earth who enjoy
joking and singing but are powerful and formidable foes when
roused to anger. Bilbo falls in love with elvish culture: “tired as

                                                                  19
he was, Bilbo would have liked to stay awhile. Elvish singing
is not a thing to miss, in June, under the stars. . . . Elves know
a lot and are wondrous folk for news, and know what is going
on among the people of the land, as quick as water flows, or
quicker.”(56) The elves seem deeply connected to nature and to
their environment.
   When Elrond meets with the group, he is able to give
them important information about their quest. He identifies
the swords they found as “old swords, very old swords of the
high elves of the west . . . they were made in Gondolin for the
Goblin-wars.” (58) This information will prove crucial in the
next chapter. Elrond is also able to find and read hidden runes
on the dwarves’ map that identify how to locate a secret door
leading to Smaug’s lair. It is important to note that, although
Elrond does not play a large role in the action of the story, the
quest would never have been completed without his advice.
This prefigures the role that Elrond plays in most of Tolkien’s
writing and how he influences most of the events that take
place in Middle-Earth.

            Chapter Four: Over Hill and Under Hill
The party begins the long and treacherous crossing of the
Misty Mountains. After encountering a particularly heavy
thunderstorm, which includes giants throwing boulders along
the mountain range, the party takes shelter in a cave. However,
the cave is a trap set by the goblins who live under the Misty
Mountains. While Bilbo and the dwarves are captured by the
goblins, Gandalf is able to escape due to Bilbo’s warning. The
dwarves and Bilbo are taken before the Great Goblin, who
finds the Elvish swords and flies into a rage. The goblins are
about to kill the adventurers when Gandalf returns. To this
point in the narrative so far, Gandalf’s value has been depicted
through his intelligence and good humor, but the following
scene reveals the power of Gandalf the wizard:

     Murderers and elf-friends! the Great Goblin shouted. . . .
     He was in such a rage that he jumped off his seat and
     himself rushed at Thorin with his mouth open.

20
     Just at that moment all the lights in the cavern went
  out . . . into a tower of blue glowing smoke, right up to
  the roof, that scattered piercing white sparks all among
  the goblins.
     The yells and yammering . . . that followed were beyond
  description. . . . The sparks were burning holes in the
  goblins, and the smoke that now fell from the roof made
  the air too thick for even their eyes to see through. Soon
  they were falling over one another in heaps on the floor. . . .
  Suddenly a sword flashed in its own light. Bilbo saw it go
  right through the Great Goblin as he stood dumbfounded
  in the middle of his rage. He fell dead and the goblin
  soldiers fled before the sword shrieking in the darkness. (72)

   Note the contrasting way Gandalf is depicted in this passage
as compared to how he is portrayed in the various noncomba-
tive situations in which he finds himself. The description and
role of the magic sword Glamdring is also an important inclu-
sion. Material items, such as swords and armor, play central
roles in Tolkien’s fiction. Swords are symbolic of might and
valor, but they also serve as emblems of the highest arts of the
cultures that produced them. Tolkien’s material items are also
a means of conveying a sense of the history of Middle-Earth,
as they often trace their power and importance back to a great
leader of battle in the history of one of the region’s races. A
majority of the characters of the story are familiar with the
history and reputation of material items such as these highly
prized, magic swords.
   After Gandalf kills the Great Goblin, he leads the party on
its escape from the goblin dungeons. As the group is running
through the dark passages, however, they lose Bilbo, who hits
his head on a wall and tumbles down a dark tunnel. Yet what
at first seems like a stroke of bad luck for Bilbo turns out to be
one of the pivotal events in the history of Middle-Earth.

             Chapter Five: Riddles in the Dark
Bilbo seems hopelessly lost in the goblin-infested catacombs
beneath the Misty Mountains. However, it is here that the

                                                                    21
reader begins to see the value of Bilbo’s courage, wit, and prag-
matic thinking. Up to this point in the narrative, Bilbo has
mostly been a comic character, partaking in the adventure but
not really cut out for it. In chapter five, he transforms from a
comic presence to a heroic one, a change that will occur over
the rest of the story and for the rest of his life in Tolkien’s later
Middle-Earth tales. As Tolkien writes, “It was a turning point
in his career, but he did not know it.” (76)
   What prompts or causes this change in Bilbo? Throughout
the narrative, Gandalf has been hinting that there was more
to Bilbo than his initial presence suggests. Thus, one possible
answer is that by finding himself alone, lost, and in danger,
Bilbo finally finds a reason to assert his heroic qualities that
he would otherwise repress. Another possible reason for this
change in Bilbo’s character is that, while he is lost in the dark,
Bilbo finds a magic gold ring. The ring, it turns out, is a very
special object. Bilbo’s possessing of the ring could also be the
source of his alteration, changing him from a quiet hobbit into
a daring hero. The ring factors in all the heroic actions Bilbo
undertakes in The Hobbit, so there is textual evidence to support
this theory. While the ring will have significant import to the
action related in The Lord of the Rings, in The Hobbit, two cen-
tral facts about the object emerge: It can make Bilbo invisible
and, before Bilbo found it, the ring belonged to Gollum.
   Tolkien introduces Gollum to the reader: “Deep down here
by the dark water lived old Gollum, a small slimy creature. . . .
He was Gollum—as dark as darkness, except for two big round
pale eyes in his thin face . . . he was looking out of his pale lamp-
like eyes for blind fish, which he grabbed with his long fingers as
quick as thinking. He liked meat too.” (80) While Gollum will
emerge as one of the central characters in The Lord of the Rings,
in The Hobbit he primarily plays the role of the first danger Bilbo
must overcome on his own. As soon as Gollum hears Bilbo, he
sneaks up on Bilbo, declaring, “‘bless us and splash us, my pre-
cious! I guess it’s a choice feast; at least a tasty morsel it’d make
us, Gollum!’ And when he said Gollum he made a horrible swal-
lowing noise in his throat. That is how he got his name, though
he always called himself my precious.” (80)

22
   Bilbo, faced with a slimy creature that wants to eat him,
draws his sword, warning Gollum that it was made by elves
many years ago. Gollum, not wanting to fight a sword-
swinging hobbit, despite his desire to eat the hobbit, proposes
a game of riddles. If Bilbo wins, Gollum will show him the
way out of the catacombs; if Gollum wins, he gets to eat Bilbo.
Throughout the game, both Bilbo and Gollum know some of
the answers, while both also answer with very lucky guesses.
Luck seems to play a large role in chapter five and emerges as
a key theme. Here, luck is more properly considered in terms
of good fortune or providence. These terms imply that something
lucky happened but that the luck was the result of something
more than blind chance. (Gandalf will explicate this idea in
the closing passages of the last chapters of the book.) Fortune
or providence suggests that there is a reason why something
lucky has happened, perhaps even a “higher power” operating
on behalf of and looking out for Bilbo or a sense of Bilbo’s pre-
scribed destiny having a hand in shaping these events.
   This analysis can lead the reader to ponder the involve-
ment of Bilbo in all these worldly events. On his own, it seems
unlikely that Bilbo would have decided to go adventuring to
unknown places, yet as a result of Gandalf knocking on his
door one morning, that is where he ends up. Why did Gandalf
pick Bilbo? Was Bilbo just a random selection, or did Gandalf
have a deeper reason for selecting Bilbo? Is this an example of
Bilbo’s fate, his destiny?
   Eventually, Bilbo wins the riddle game by “accidentally”
asking the winning question. Fortune can be seen in the depic-
tion of this event: “Bilbo pinched himself and slapped himself;
he gripped his little sword; he even felt in his pocket with his
other hand. There he found the ring he had picked up in the
passage and forgotten about. ‘What have I got in my pocket?’
he said aloud. He was talking to himself, but Gollum thought
it was a riddle.”(87) Gollum is unable to answer this question,
and Bilbo wins the riddle game. However, Gollum’s treach-
erous character reveals itself as he still plans on tricking Bilbo
and eating him, despite promising not to if Bilbo won the
game. Gollum, telling Bilbo he needs to retrieve something

                                                               23
before he can show Bilbo the way out, returns to his cave to
look for his “precious.” However, the precious, which is what
Gollum calls the ring, is missing, as it is in Bilbo’s pocket.
Gollum makes the connection between the missing ring and
Bilbo’s last riddle and flies into an uncontrollable, murderous
rage. Bilbo, sensing the rage in Gollum’s voice, begins to look
for a way out of Gollum’s cave:

     He put his left hand in his pocket. The ring felt very cold
     as it quietly slipped on to his groping forefinger. The hiss
     was close behind him. He turned and saw Gollum’s eyes
     like small green lamps coming up the slope. Terrified he
     tried to run faster, but suddenly he struck his toes on a
     snag in the floor and fell flat with his little sword under
     him. In a moment Gollum was on him. But before Bilbo
     could do anything . . . Gollum passed by, taking no notice
     of him (92).

   This passage raises several significant considerations. First,
Tolkien reveals how Bilbo learned of the power of the ring to
make him invisible; second, he raises the question of agency
and the ring. Note that Tolkien wrote that the ring “quietly
slipped on to” Bilbo’s finger. The sentence implies that Bilbo
did not consciously decide to put the ring on his finger but that
it possibly decided to put itself on his finger. Consider also the
use of the word quietly. Why note that a ring quietly slipped on
to a finger. Do rings normally make noise when put on or off
a finger? Quietly, in this context, can imply acting in a sneaky,
or undetected manner. It seems, from Tolkien’s prose, that the
ring has agency. Note this characteristic of the ring and try to
detect if, in other scenes depicting it, the ring seems to act as if
it has a will of its own. Another point to consider is if this char-
acteristic of the ring alters or has any bearing on the themes of
fate and luck suggested earlier in this chapter.
   Bilbo, wearing the ring, follows Gollum up the winding pas-
sages to escape. Bilbo escapes the clutches of Gollum, but as
Gollum’s closing speech indicates, the rivalry between Gollum
and the Baggins clan is far from over: “Thief, thief, thief!

24
Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, we hates it for ever!” (96)
Although this is Gollum’s last appearance in The Hobbit, his
hatred of the hobbits will fuel much of the action of The Lord of
the Rings.
   Having escaped from Gollum and the deepest realms
of the mountains, Bilbo still needs to sneak by the goblins
guarding the exit. When reading Tolkien’s description of
Bilbo’s encounter with the goblin guards, note the developing
relationship between the will of Bilbo and the will of the ring:

  They saw him sooner than he saw them. Yes they saw
  him. Whether it was an accident, or a last trick of the ring
  before it took a new master, it was not upon his finger.
  With yells of delight the goblins rushed upon him. A
  pang of fear and loss, like an echo of Gollum’s misery,
  smote Bilbo, and forgetting even to draw his sword he
  struck his hands into his pockets. And there was the ring
  still, in his left pocket, and it slipped on his finger. He had
  vanished. (98)

Why did Tolkien compare Bilbo and Gollum at this point?

        Chapter Six: Out of the Frying Pan into the Fire
The chapter opens with a reunion of Bilbo, Gandalf, and the
dwarves. Bilbo tells them about his adventures in the lowest
depths of the mountains and details his encounter with and
escape from Gollum. However, Bilbo “forgets” to tell the
group about the ring. This omission may prompt the reader to
ask, was suppressing the discovery of such an object really acci-
dental? Did Bilbo or the ring decide to conceal the identity of
its possessor?
    The party resumes its journey, but the adventurers soon dis-
cover that they have not yet escaped from the evil of the goblin
army living in the Misty Mountains. A pack of wargs (evil
wolves that work alongside goblins to spread terror and war
throughout the countryside) attacks the party. The group tries
to escape the wargs by climbing trees, but they only succeed in
trapping themselves, as the wargs, joined by goblins, circle the

                                                                    25
trees and begin trying to roust the dwarves. Gandalf uses magic
to kill some of the wargs, but the number of evil creatures
increases so rapidly that he fears he cannot kill them all before
the party is overrun.
   This scene reveals elements of the state of nature as por-
trayed in Tolkien’s fiction. For Tolkien, nature is not simply an
inert, neural thing but a force that may be aligned with other
good or evil forces. Some locales, such as Rivendale, propagate
good, while others, such as Mirkwood (see chapter twenty),
promote evil and act to hurt the characters. Likewise, Tolkien’s
natural world is not without its sensory abilities; it can hear and
communicate with the people who inhabit it. Almost all ani-
mals can hear and speak, and most are organized into kingdoms
much like the people of Middle-Earth are. In this chapter, the
evil wargs and their chief are contrasted by the positive force of
the eagles and their noble lord. Tolkien describes the balance:

     Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are cowardly and cruel.
     But the ancient race of the northern mountains were
     the greatest of all birds; they were proud and strong
     and noble hearted. They did not love Goblins, or fear
     them. When they took any notice of them at all . . . they
     swooped on them and drove them shrieking back to their
     caves, and stopped what ever wickedness they were doing.
     The goblins hated the eagles and feared them. (114)

                Chapter Seven: Queer Lodgings
The adventurers take leave of the eagles and continue on their
journey east to the Lonely Mountain. Gandalf informs the
dwarves that he has pressing business elsewhere and cannot
accompany them on their journey much longer. Before leaving,
Gandalf introduces the party to Beorn, a magical being who
lives in a cabin in the middle of the wilds. He is able to trans-
form from a man into a bear, and in his bear form he travels his
lands, protecting the animals that live there.
   In addition to his wondrous ability to shape-shift, Beorn is
also an emblem of Tolkien’s ecological concerns. The natural
world is almost always presented as something to be treasured

26
and preserved in Tolkien’s fiction, and Beorn acts as a type of
ecological guardian in The Hobbit. Tolkien writes that Beorn
“keeps cattle and horses which are nearly as marvelous as him-
self. They work for him and talk to him. He does not eat them;
neither does he hunt or eat wild animals.” (127) Beorn is a
hermit and generally does not enjoy company. This provides an
opportunity for Gandalf to use his wit to devise a humorous plan
for Beorn to accept the dwarves into his home. Beorn finds Gan-
dalf’s plan and the party’s behavior charming and witty, and he
welcomes them into his home, extending them full hospitality.
Again, we see that in Tolkien’s world, social skills such as wit and
charm are as valuable as sorcery and swordsmanship.
   The group discovers that Beorn has a special hatred of
goblins, because they defile the environment and are cruel to
animals. When he learns of the death of the Great Goblin, he
rewards the party with food and supplies for the rest of their
journey and gives them two pieces of advice about trying to
cross Mirkwood: They should not drink any water found in the
forest and should never leave the path that crosses Mirkwood.
He hints that doing either would lead to destruction. As the
party prepares to enter Mirkwood, Gandalf departs, reminding
them of Beorn’s warning: “Don’t leave the path.” (152)

                  Chapter Eight: Flies and Spiders
The setting of this chapter merits closer analysis. Mirkwood
is a huge forest, almost massive beyond belief. When looking
at the maps Tolkien provides with The Hobbit, the forest seems
to be the largest natural obstacle in the realm, even wider and
longer than the mountain ranges. Following Tolkien’s method,
Mirkwood is an area inclined to evil. Whether this is because
the forest itself is evil or because of the evil creatures that dwell
there is not specified. The dreaded Necromancer lives in the
woods, as do various other monsters. Mirkwood is described as
a spooky, haunted place, full of potential pitfalls:

  There were black squirrels in the wood. As Bilbo’s sharp
  inquisitive eyes got used to seeing things he could catch
  glimpses of them whisking off the path and scuttling

                                                                  27
     behind tree trunks. There were queer noises too, grunts,
     scufflings, and hurryings in the undergrowth, and among
     the leaves that lay piled endlessly thick in places on the
     forest floor; but what made the noises he could not see.
     The nastiest things they saw were the cobwebs: dark
     dense cobwebs with threads extraordinarily thick . . .
     it was not long before they grew to hate the forest as
     heartily as they had hated the tunnels of the goblins, and
     it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending. (154)

   As the chapter continues, the forest becomes more and
more claustrophobic, and the spirits of the party increas-
ingly sink into gloom. After what seems like weeks of hiking
through Mirkwood, the group finds its way barred by a sin-
ister-looking river. Following Bilbo’s advice, the party is able
to cross the river, but calamity strikes as Bombur falls into
the river during the crossing. The dwarves are able to pull
him out of the water, yet he has already fallen victim to its
spell: “When they laid him on the bank he was already fast
asleep . . . and fast asleep he remained in spite of all they
could do”(159). The dwarves are not able to rouse Bombur
from his enchanted sleep, and they are forced to carry him as
they follow the path. Of course, Bombur is the fattest of the
dwarves, so their progress is slow.
   Having failed to heed the first bit of Beorn’s advice, it is not
long before the party makes the erroneous decision to disre-
gard the second bit of his advice: Do not leave the path. Pushed
by hunger and fatigue, the party arrives at a desperate decision.
They keep seeing what appear to be torches and campfires off
the path deep in the woods. Curious, the group leaves the path
and sneaks up on the fires. The camp, to their surprise, is a
group of elves enjoying a cookout in the forest, but as soon as
the dwarves are discovered, the fire is immediately extinguished
and the elves disappear. The campfires keep reappearing, how-
ever, a little deeper in the woods, yet each time the dwarves
approach, the fires again are snuffed out. Finally, after the fires
have disappeared yet again, Bilbo hears the dwarves getting in
trouble and calling for help, but he is unable to find them.

28
   What is the potential significance of the fires in this scene?
In one sense, they can be seen as a will-o’-the-wisp, a light that
leads lonely travelers into a trap. Are the elves real? If so, why
do they not stay to help Bilbo and the dwarves? Are these elves
to be considered dangerous because of where they live? Elves
are generally among the best-natured people of Middle-Earth,
yet they are living in one of its regions most closely aligned
with evil. Are these elves able to transform their environment
for the better, or does their environment change them for the
worse? A reader considering these questions may want to con-
sult Tolkien’s brief depiction of the wood elves and how they
differ from the elves of Rivendale.
   Bilbo, miserable at being alone again, sits down and begins
to brood and taunt himself with thoughts of breakfast back in
his warm, comfortable hobbit hole. While he ruminates, a giant
spider sneaks up on him and tries to capture him in a web. Bilbo
reacts instinctively and quickly kills the spider. For the second
time, the reader sees Bilbo’s heroic character emerge.

  There was the usual dim grey light of the forest day about
  him when he came to his senses. The spider lay dead beside
  him and his sword blade was stained black. Somehow the
  killing of the giant spider, all alone by himself in the dark
  without the help of the wizard or the dwarves or of anyone
  else made a great difference to Mr. Baggins. He felt a
  different person, and much fiercer and bolder in spite of an
  empty stomach, as he wiped his sword on the grass and put
  it back in its sheath. “I will give you a name,” he said to it,
  and “I shall call you Sting.” (170)

   Bilbo, emboldened by his heroic killing of the giant crea-
ture, begins to look for his friends. He finds them, but they
have been successfully captured by the spiders and are hanging
upside down from a tree, cocooned in webs. The spiders
greatly outnumber Bilbo, but he still decides to risk his life to
rescue his friends. Again, this decision raises the consideration
of whether this heroic action is something native to Bilbo’s
character or is the result of Bilbo being thrust into a heroic

                                                                    29
situation. Bilbo the spider slayer stands in sharp contrast to the
figure Bilbo presented in the early chapters of the novel. Com-
pare the Bilbo of the forest, charging a multitude of spiders
with his sword Sting, to the Bilbo of chapter one, where he was
more concerned with baking cakes and cleaning dishes than
with combat.
   After a long and well-orchestrated battle, Bilbo’s strategy
proves successful, and he rescues the dwarves and leads their
escape. Bilbo seems more like a grim warrior than a hobbit, as
he “darted backwards and forwards, slashing at spider threads,
hacking at their legs, and stabbing at their fat bodies if they
came too near. The spiders swelled with rage, and sputtered
and frothed, and hissed out horrible curses; but they had
become mortally afraid of Sting.” (179) Tolkien ends the
combat by describing the new Bilbo: “Bilbo began to feel there
really was something of the bold adventurer about himself after
all, though he would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had
been anything to eat.” (181) Tolkien masterfully retains Bilbo’s
loveable, humorous qualities, even after he has proved him-
self to be a warrior. As soon as the fight is over, Bilbo’s hobbit
nature reasserts itself.
   The dangers of Mirkwood are many, however, and even
though the party escaped from the spiders, they are still lost
deep in the wood, having strayed far from the path. The weary
dwarves discover that Thorin is missing, and they fear the
worst. Although the dwarves suspect they have lost Thorin
forever, Tolkien concludes the chapter by revealing that Thorin
has been captured by the wood elves and is locked in the dun-
geon of the elf king.

              Chapter Nine: Barrels out of Bond
The dwarves are captured by the wood elves and brought
before the wood elf king. Bilbo uses his ring to avoid capture
and follows the elves and their prisoners back to the king’s cave.
As is typical of elvish communities, the cave city is majestic,
clean, and rather homely. The king asks the dwarves why they
are wandering around Mirkwood. They refuse to tell him,
so he orders them held in his prison. Tolkien makes sure to

30
inform the reader that the elves took good care of their pris-
oners and tend to their well-being.
   Bilbo, alone again, uses his ring to remain hidden “for a
weary long time.” (188) Bilbo takes advantage of his invisibility
to explore the elf king’s palace, eventually locating the prison
cells of the dwarves. Bilbo, using his knowledge of the palace,
develops a rescue plan. During a rather festive gathering, when
all the elves are celebrating and getting drunk, Bilbo frees the
dwarves from their cells. Bilbo’s escape plan is a good example
of his pragmatic thinking, as it would not be possible for the
dwarves to break out of the palace by force or to sneak by the
elves, whether the elves are drunk or not. Bilbo’s creative solu-
tion is to hide the dwarves in barrels and then push the barrels
into a river, letting them float away from the elf king’s palace to
the edge of the forest. Bilbo’s solution is notable, as it demon-
strates his intelligence and avoids the necessity for a confronta-
tion with the wood elves.
   As the journey and its dangers continue, the dwarves’ atti-
tude toward Bilbo begins to change. At first, the dwarves
thought Bilbo a silly fool, a useless burden on the adventure.
As the journey proceeds, and after Bilbo was able to use his
wits (or courage or magic ring) to save the dwarves time and
time again, the dwarves start to view Bilbo quite differently.
They now see him as a successful burglar and adventurer and
constantly turn to him for advice. They respect him and treat
him as an equal. This is important to note, because this attitude
will provide a sharp contrast to the dwarves’ behavior after they
have found the treasure and succumbed to gold lust.

               Chapter Ten: A Warm Welcome
The dwarves and Bilbo float down the river until it empties
into Long Lake at the foot of the human city of Lake-town.
This community is inhabited by the descendants of the people
who used to live in harmony with the dwarves of the Lonely
Mountain many years ago, before the dragon Smaug took up
residence there. The people of Lake-town still know of the
legends of the King under the Mountain and, when they dis-
cover Thorin and the dwarves, they rejoice, believing that the

                                                                31
dwarves have returned and that the riches of the Lonely Moun-
tain will again spread throughout the land. The town’s people
welcome the dwarves, allowing them to rest and recuperate,
and then resupplying them for their final assault on the dragon.

               Chapter Eleven: On the Doorstep
Bilbo and the dwarves have reached the end of their journey,
yet the most dangerous part of their adventure remains:
defeating the dragon Smaug. The group is demoralized,
as they realize they do not have a definite plan for fighting
Smaug. Eventually they find the ledge where the secret door
into the mountain is located, but they have no idea how
to open the door. An elderly thrush appears and refuses to
leave. Bilbo, ever perceptive, takes a hint from the thrush and
uncovers the secret keyhole, enabling Thorin to unlock the
door. As is becoming a recurring pattern in the novel, Bilbo
has again proved his worth.

               Chapter Twelve: Inside Information
The dwarves declare that it is time for Bilbo to “earn his
reward” and sneak into the dragon’s lair and steal something.
Bilbo rightly answers that he has already earned his share but
slips on his magic ring and descends down the secret pas-
sageway. The passage leads directly to the main lair of Smaug:
“There he lay, a vast red-golden dragon, fast asleep; a thrum-
ming came from his jaws and nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but
his fires were low in slumber. Beneath him, under all his limbs
and huge coiled tail, and about him on all sides stretching
away across the unseen floors, lay countless piles of precious
things, gold wrought and unwrought, gems and jewels, and
silver.” (233)
   The dragon’s hoard is impressively vast, and Bilbo is spell-
bound by the treasure. Regaining his senses, he steals a golden
cup and runs back up the passage to the ledge where the
dwarves are waiting for him. The dwarves are overjoyed at
Bilbo’s accomplishment, yet their joy does not last long, as they
can hear the dragon awaken. Dragons apparently are not so
easy to steal from after all: “Dragons may not have much real

32
use for all their wealth, but they know it to an ounce as a rule,
especially after a long possession, and Smaug was no excep-
tion. . . . There was a breath of fresh air in his cave. . . . He
stirred and stretched forth his neck to sniff. Then he missed
the cup! Thieves! Fire! Murder! Such a thing had not hap-
pened since he first came to the mountain!” (236)
    Tolkien describes the dragon almost as a force of nature, as
if the treasure is an extension of his identity or physical being,
and his violent reaction to a single missing cup is like the angry
defense of an animal guarding its lair. Tolkien will continue to
play with natural imagery as he describes Smaug over the next
few chapters, comparing him to thunder or an earthquake. In
his rage, the dragon flies out of his lair, drenching the entire
mountainside in flames. The adventurers are only able to sur-
vive by hiding from the dragon in the secret passage. Eventu-
ally the dragon tires and returns to his golden bed to set a trap
for the thief. The dwarves are perplexed about what to do next,
and Bilbo, having already proved himself to be a hero, proves
himself to be a strong leader as well. He decides to don his
ring and spy on the dragon to see if Smaug has any weaknesses.
“Naturally the dwarves accepted the offer eagerly. Already they
had come to respect little Bilbo. Now he had become a real
leader in their adventure.” (240)
    Bilbo sneaks down the tunnel and finds what he thinks is a
sleeping dragon. Smaug, however, is pretending to be asleep
in order to catch the thief, and it is only because Bilbo is invis-
ible that he is spared. Since Smaug can smell but not see Bilbo,
the dragon engages him in conversation in an attempt to cap-
ture him. During this encounter, Bilbo again effectively mixes
courage and pragmatism. He is courageous enough to spy
on the dragon but not foolhardy enough to reveal himself to
Smaug when the dragon pretends to welcome him into his lair.
Bilbo and Smaug enter into a battle of wits, and each is able to
gain something from the other. Smaug is able to trick Bilbo into
revealing the existence of the dwarves, but more importantly,
Bilbo is able to trick Smaug into showing him his belly. Bilbo
flatters Smaug, who, responding, turns over to show off his
jewel-encrusted underside, while simultaneously allowing Bilbo

                                                                33
to discover Smaug’s one weakness: “The dragon rolled over.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘What do you say to that?’ ‘Dazzlingly mar-
velous! Perfect! Flawless! Staggering!’ exclaimed Bilbo aloud,
but what he thought inside was: ‘Old fool! Why there is a large
patch in the hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its
shell.’” (246) Bilbo, flush from outsmarting the dragon, ventures
a joke at the dragon’s expense, and Smaug responds by blasting
his chamber with fire. Bilbo is barely able to escape.
   Back outside, Bilbo tells the dwarves everything he has
learned, especially about Smaug’s weakness. The same thrush
that helped Bilbo find the keyhole on the secret door seems to
be listening intently to his report. Thorin notices the thrush
and explains that the thrushes were a noble race of birds that
lived in harmony with the residents of the mountain and valley
before the dragon came. He also reveals that these thrushes
can speak. The thrushes’ verbal abilities are another example
of how Tolkien presents the natural world as full of intelligent,
knowledgeable creatures. The animals of Middle-earth have
their own cultures, languages, and histories and, as such, are as
integral to the world as humans are.
   As Thorin begins to recall the legends of the treasure of the
Lonely Mountain, he obsesses on one artifact in particular: the
Arkenstone. While Thorin recalls the wonder of the Arken-
stone, the party heads back into the passage for safety—and just
in time, it turns out, as Smaug has emerged from the mountain,
full of rage, and with plans to kill everything and everyone
he can find. He blasts the mountain with fire, destroying the
secret door, and heads off into the night, belching flames.

                Chapter Thirteen: Not at Home
Suspense and tension mark this chapter as the dwarves are
trapped inside the mountain and inside the dragon’s lair.
The dwarves wait in fear, expecting the dragon to return any
moment and destroy them. Despite their anxious vigil, how-
ever, the dragon does not return. Instead, the dwarves start
to reveal another aspect of their character, as the lure of the
treasure outweighs any fear they have of the dragon, and they
begin to explore the dragon’s hoard.

34
   The dwarves outfit themselves with armor and weapons,
and Bilbo comes across another important object: the Arken-
stone. He finds the legendary stone but does not tell the
dwarves about it. Rather, he quietly puts it in his pocket:
“Now I am a burglar indeed . . . but I suppose I must tell the
dwarves about it—some time.” (257) For now, Bilbo keeps his
secret. Why does he withhold such information, as it seems
out of character for him? Has he fallen victim to treasure
lust? After all the accusations from Gollum and Smaug, has
he really become a thief ? Or was Bilbo’s finding of the Arken-
stone yet another example of his fate or destiny as a powerful
guiding force in his story?

               Chapter Fourteen: Fire and Water
This chapter reveals why the dragon did not return to kill
the dwarves. After destroying the secret door, Smaug flew to
Lake-town, trailing death as he went. Smaug attacks the town,
causing mayhem and destruction. He would have succeeded in
killing everyone, except for a small band of warriors who stood
their ground and fought the dragon. This group was led by one
grim warrior named Bard, who refuses to flee. In a climactic
scene, Bard and the dragon do battle:

  But there was still a company of archers that held their
  ground among the burning houses. Their captain was
  Bard, grim voiced and grim faced . . . he was a descendant
  in a long line of Girion, Lord of Dale . . . now he shot
  with a great yew bow till all his arrows but one were spent
  . . . suddenly, out of the dark, something fluttered to
  his shoulder. He started—but it was only an old thrush.
  Unafraid it perched by his ear and brought him news.
  Marveling he found he could understand its tongue, for
  he was of the race of Dale. (270)

   The thrush tells Bard of the dragon’s one weak spot, the
lone unarmored spot on his chest. Bard draws his last arrow, a
magical black one, which had been a gift to his family from the
last King under the Mountain, ages before Smaug appeared.

                                                                35
     The dragon swooped once more lower than ever, and as
     he turned and dived down his belly glittered white with
     sparkling fires of gems in the moon—but not in one
     place. The great bow twanged. The black arrow sped
     straight from the string, straight for the hollow by the left
     breast . . . In it smote and vanished, barb shaft and feather
     . . . with a shriek that deafened men, felled trees and split
     stone, Smaug shot spouting into the air, turned over, and
     crashed down from on high in ruin. (270)

   The death of Smaug cannot be fully celebrated, however, as
Lake-town has been destroyed in the battle and the surviving
residents left destitute. They call for Bard, the dragon slayer, to
become King Bard and lead them to rebuild their community.
The Master of Lake-town attempts to beguile the crowd into
keeping him as leader, revealing only his desire for personal
power and wealth over the general good of the people. While
the people of Lake-town are trying to make survival plans, an
elvish army, led by the elf king of the forest, appears.
   The elf king and his army, having heard about the death
of the dragon, quickly set out to claim a share of the treasure
as their own. Being elves, they are able to move quickly and
appear on the scene almost instantaneously. Their speed, it
turns out, proves a boon for the surviving people of Lake-
town, as the elves share their food and shelter with the humans.
Again, Tolkien wants to demonstrate that the elves, led by their
king, and the humans, led by Bard, are good beings who are
simply laying claim to what they believe is their justified share
of the treasure. Bard and the surviving warriors of Lake-town
agree to join with the elf king and march on Lonely Mountain.
   With the claims the elves and the humans make on their
share of the dragon’s treasure, Tolkien wants to depict the
elves and humans as driven not by greed alone but motivated
by actual need. Bard notes that Smaug destroyed Lake-town
(and that he had preyed on the lake men for years) and that the
humans will need money if they are to survive and rebuild their
town. The elves likewise claim that Smaug had stolen some of
the treasure from the elves and that his presence had negatively

36
impacted their kingdom. Are these respective claims justified
and honorable, or are they an attempt to take part of the trea-
sure by force? Are these demands in or out of character? How
does the reader anticipate Thorin’s reply?

          Chapter Fifteen: The Gathering of the Clouds
As chapter fifteen opens, Bilbo and the dwarves are con-
tinuing their inventory of the dragon’s treasure, when they are
interrupted by the old thrush and a raven. The birds tell the
dwarves about the death of Smaug and the approaching army
of men and elves. The birds tell Thorin that Bard is a just and
honorable leader and that the armies only seek their fair share.
Thorin and the dwarves are in the grip of treasure lust and can
think of little besides protecting all the gold. They send the
raven to bring the news to Thorin’s cousin Dain, a leader of a
kingdom of dwarves in the Iron Hills, and to ask him to send
an army of dwarves to help defend the treasure. They then set
about fortifying the mountain.
    After several days, the army of elves and men appear before
the mountain, and Bard, the elf king, and Thorin hold a
meeting. Bard presents his claim, and Thorin quickly dismisses
it. Finally, Bard sends a herald to the gate of the mountain:

  In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest, one cried, we
  speak unto Thorin Thrain’s son Oakenshield, calling
  himself King under the Mountain, and we bid him
  consider well the claims that have been urged, or be
  declared our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth
  portion of the treasure unto Bard, as the dragon slayer
  and as the heir of Girion. From that portion Bard will
  himself contribute to the aid of Esgaroth; but if Thorin
  would have the friendship and honor of the lands about,
  as his sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat of
  his own for the comfort of the men of the lake. (287–88)

   Tolkien makes one last effort to depict the claim of Bard,
as the slayer of the dragon, as justified and reasonable, as Bard
offers to use his own share of the treasure to help rebuild the

                                                                37
town. He also appeals to Thorin’s sense of charity, to donate
a tiny amount of his gold to help his poor and starving people.
Tolkien makes Bard’s last offer inarguably reasonable in order
to highlight the unreasonableness of Thorin’s refusal. Thorin,
tragically, is no longer acting reasonably, as he has fallen victim
to treasure lust as well.

               Chapter Sixteen: A Thief in the Night
The raven and thrush return to tell Thorin that Dain has
answered his call and has led an army of dwarves from the
Iron Hills to the Lonely Mountain. Thorin rejoices at this
news, but the birds plead with Thorin to forgo war and to
strike a truce with Bard. Thorin rejects this sound counsel.
Why, however, do the birds keep asking Thorin to avoid
battle? Since the birds are not dwarves, they are immune to
the treasure lust that besets Thorin and his party. This desire
to avoid bloodshed also allows Tolkien one last chance to
demonstrate the essential goodness of the people involved in
this struggle over the gold and, more importantly, allows the
author to justify Bilbo’s next action.
   Bilbo, as a hobbit, is not as strongly affected by the treasure
as the dwarves are and is able to see the logic and justice in the
claims presented by Bard. Likewise, he is peaceful by nature
and does not want to see three races—elves, dwarves, and
humans—fight one another in a battle. Finally, Bilbo is afraid
that the coming battle will cause some of his friends to lose
their lives, dying in a meaningless and unnecessary war.
   To avoid this catastrophe, Bilbo comes up with a daring
plan. He puts on his ring and, taking the Arkenstone with
him, sneaks out of the mountain and down into the joint
human-elvish camp. Bilbo tries to make a deal with Bard and
the elf king, telling them he is willing to divide his personal
share of the treasure with the men and elves of Lake-town, as
long as that would prevent a war. To proves his trustworthi-
ness, Bilbo gives them the Arkenstone to use as ransom for
his share of the treasure. Bard and the elf king declare Bilbo
to be a good and honorable hobbit and agree to his deal.
Bilbo announces that he will return to his friends the dwarves,

38
because in his mind he was not betraying them but simply
trying to stop a fight among those who should be otherwise
peaceable. As Bilbo is leaving Bard’s camp, he is approached
by an old man: “ ‘Well done! Mr Baggins!’ he said, clapping
Bilbo on the back. ‘There is always more about you than
anyone expects.’ It was Gandalf ”(295).

             Chapter Seventeen: The Clouds Burst
Dain and his army have reached the mountain, and the pros-
pects for peace look bleak. Bard approaches the mountain and
makes one final negotiation to attempt to avoid war. Following
Bilbo’s plan, Bard reveals that he has the Arkenstone and will
return it to the dwarves in exchange for Bilbo’s share of the
treasure. When Thorin hears of Bilbo’s plan, he curses Bilbo
and declares him an enemy for life. Not even Gandalf can
change Thorin’s mind:

  “By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse
  him for his choice of you! May his beard wither! As for
  you I will throw you to the rocks!” he cried and lifted
  Bilbo in his arms.
      “Stay! Your wish is granted!” said a voice . . . “Here
  is Gandalf! And none to soon it seems. If you don’t like
  my burglar please don’t damage him. Put him down and
  listen to what he has to say!”
      “You all seem in league!” said Thorin dropping Bilbo
  on the top of the wall. “Never again will I have dealings
  with any wizard or his friends. What have you to say, you
  descendant of rats?”
      “Dear me!” said Bilbo . . . “You may remember saying
  that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps
  I took it too literally. I have been told that dwarves are
  sometimes politer in word than in deed. The time was,
  all the same, when you seemed to think that I had been
  of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this all the
  service of you and your family that I was promised? Take
  it that I have disposed of my share as I wished, and let it
  go at that!” (297–98)

                                                                 39
   This exchange between Bilbo, Thorin, and Gandalf offers
rich interpretive opportunities. First, it allows the reader to see
how greatly the treasure lust has affected Thorin, drastically
altering his character. After all that Bilbo has done over the
course of the narrative, it is easy to see that Thorin’s attack on
Bilbo is unjustified, and his rejection of his old friend Gandalf
is unfair. It also reveals how generally good-natured and fair-
minded hobbits are and how pointless some wars are.
   Thorin continues to reject Bard’s offer and everyone’s advice
to make a peaceful settlement. Battle seems unavoidable,
and the armies of dwarves, humans, and elves prepare for
combat. The battle is just about to start when Gandalf magi-
cally appears between the armies: “in a voice like thunder, and
his staff blazed forth with a flash like the lightning. “Dread
has come upon you all! Alas! it has come more swiftly than I
guessed. The Goblins are upon you . . . They ride upon wolves
and Wargs are in their train!” (302)
   Earlier in the novel, when the party had been captured in
the Misty Mountains by goblins, they killed the Great Goblin
and many of his tribe during their escape. In the meantime,
while the party was journeying through Mirkwood and eventu-
ally to the Lonely Mountain, the goblins had sworn revenge
and amassed a large army made up of all the goblin tribes of
the wild. This goblin army now appears before the Lonely
Mountain, eager and bloodthirsty. Sensing their doom, the
elves, dwarves, and humans listen to Gandalf and form an alli-
ance to fight the goblin army. Yet even aligned, their army
pales in size to the mass of assembled goblins. The armies
engage each other, which Tolkien describes as “a terrible
battle.” (305)
   Bilbo, invisible because of his ring, takes refuge as the battle
rages around him all day. It is a long and bloody skirmish, and
despite the valor of the heroes of the story, by the end of the
day it seems as if the numbers of the goblin army are too great
and that everyone will be “slaughtered or driven down and
captured” (308). At the last moment, when it seems the goblins
are just about to be victorious, a cry rings out across the battle-
field: “‘The Eagles! The Eagles!’ he shouted. ‘The Eagles are

40
coming!’ ” (308) As Bilbo looks to the skies, a rock strikes him
on the head, and he falls unconscious.

               Chapter Eighteen: The Return Journey
Bilbo is alive, and the goblins have been defeated. A soldier
finds Bilbo, who has removed the ring, and takes him to a tent
where Bard and an injured Gandalf are waiting for him. Gandalf
leads Bilbo farther into the tent, where a sad sight awaits him.
Thorin has been wounded in the battle and is on the verge of
death. On his deathbed, Thorin apologizes for his treatment of
Bilbo before the battle and makes his final speech in the narra-
tive: “‘No!’ said Thorin. ‘There is more in you of good than you
know, child of the kindly West. Some courage and some wisdom,
blended in measure. If more of us valued food and cheer and
song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. But sad or
merry, I must leave it now. Farewell.’” (312)
   Thorin’s dying words warrant a closer look. First, the gold
lust has lost its grip on Thorin, as he loses his grip on life. Yet
Thorin realizes the error of his ways, since the dragon died,
and makes peace with Bilbo, thus cementing the friendship
between the characters that had developed over the course of
the narrative. Thorin’s words also introduce a new value system
to the world, a system in which hospitality and generosity are
valued above gold and precious stones. Finally, Tolkien reveals
something of the deeper character of hobbits as emblems of
goodness in the history of Middle-earth.
   After Thorin dies, Gandalf tells Bilbo about how the battle
ended. The arrival of the eagles slowed down the progress of
the goblin army, but it was the surprise appearance of another
old friend that turned defeat into victory. Beorn, in the form of a
giant bear, appeared “no one knew how or from where. He came
alone and in bear’s shape, and he seemed to have grown almost
to giant-size in his wrath.” (313) Again victory over evil comes
from the efforts of many good people, of various shapes and
abilities, joining together and fighting as one.
   Dain, as a blood member of the dwarven royal family,
becomes King under the Mountain. Heeding the lessons of
the battle, he divides the wealth fairly, giving treasure to Bard,

                                                                41
to the elf king, and to provide for the rebuilding of the human
city of Dale. Dain becomes a just king, and Bard proves to be
a noble king of Dale, the men and dwarves of the valley living
in harmony. Gandalf and Bilbo gather a portion of their share
of the treasure and set out on the long voyage back to Bilbo’s
home, as Bilbo was getting tired of adventures and only thought
of his comfortable armchair back in his warm hobbit hole.

                Chapter Nineteen: The Last Stage
Bilbo and Gandalf retrace their steps on their journey home,
stopping first in Rivendale, where the reason for Gandalf’s
departures at various moments in the text is revealed. Gan-
dalf and other wise and powerful wizards and elf lords had
waged war on the Necromancer, chasing him out of his dark
tower in Mirkwood. While this information does little in The
Hobbit but fill in some gaps in the story, it will prove to be a
central event in The Lord of the Rings. Bilbo also recovers the
hidden troll treasure, left behind by the party at the begin-
ning of the adventure.
   Finally, Bilbo returns home. However, in a scene foreshad-
owing Frodo’s return at the end of The Lord of the Rings, Bilbo
arrives to find that he has been declared dead and his home and
possessions put up for auction. He also discovers that he has
lost more than some possessions; he has also lost his reputation.
“For ever after he remained an elf-friend, and had the honor
of dwarves, wizards, and all such folk . . . but he was no longer
quite respectable. He was in fact held by all the hobbits of the
neighborhood to be ‘queer,’ except by his nephews and nieces
on the Took side.” (327)
   Obviously, Bilbo has become a heroic character, a friend of
the wise and powerful, and has proved himself to be a good,
just, and peace-loving person. Yet the people of his hometown
do not consider those facts when they think of him. For them,
all that matters is that he is different now, and, to them, dif-
ferent is bad, undesirable. Tolkien is obviously commenting
on the unhealthy conservatism of close-minded people. Yet
the broader point remains; once individuals make a decision
to leave the safe, traditional, and well-known enclaves behind

42
to embrace and experience life, life changes them. Living is a
process of growth that involves embracing the new, and the
rewards of life are only earned by those who take the chance of
living it.
   The final dialogue between Gandalf and Bilbo, which closes
the novel, provides the last point of discussion for The Hobbit
and complements the earlier discussions of Tolkien, Bilbo, and
destiny. Bilbo, after looking back with wonder on his adven-
ture, declares, “ ‘ Then the prophecies of the old songs have
turned out to be true, after a fashion! ’ ” (330) Gandalf replies:

  “And why should not they prove true? Surely you don’t
  disbelieve the prophecies, because you had a hand in
  bringing them about yourself? You don’t really suppose,
  do you, that all your adventures and escapes were
  managed by mere luck, just for your sole benefit? You
  are a very fine person, Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond of
  you, but you are only quite a little fellow in a wide world
  after all!” (330).

   Tolkien leaves the reader to ponder on the mix of destiny
and agency in the adventures of Bilbo Baggins and, by doing
so, enfolds the narrative into a longer, grander narrative of his-
tory and the role that individuals, no matter how small they
seem, may play in it.




                                                                43
       Critical Views

                                 KATHARYN W. CRABBE ON
                                  THE QUEST AS FAIRY TALE

In 1937 Tolkien’s first book, The Hobbit, appeared on the
children’s lists of Allen and Unwin. It was an immediate suc-
cess as a children’s book, receiving consistently good reviews,
though it made no impression at all on the adult market. Like
the fairy tales to which it is closely akin, it was thought to
be appropriate only for the nursery, though many reviewers
noted that the ideal reader of the adventures of Bilbo Baggins
would have to be imaginative, intelligent, and an excellent
reader. In writing The Hobbit, Tolkien had reasonable success
in doing what he attempted to do, but what he attempted to
do was neither complex nor ambitious. The plot is simple and
linear; the characters tend to be all good or all bad; and the
central issue—the battle between good and evil—is clearly
drawn and clearly resolved. That is, The Hobbit lacks com-
plexity in conception, in design, and in execution. Its sim-
plicity and its obviously having been written down to a naive
audience make it far less interesting and much less an artistic
achievement than The Lord of the Rings, though the two works
share many themes and some characters.
   Critics who feel driven to identify the stylistic qualities that
mark The Hobbit as a children’s book characteristically point to
the avuncular asides that appear throughout the narrative. In
such asides as, “It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly
discovered the weak point in his plan. Most likely you saw it
some time ago and have been laughing at him; but I don’t sup-
pose you would have done half so well yourselves in his place,”
they argue, the narrator not only intrudes on his own story by
stepping into the narrative frame and addressing the readers
directly, he is also coy and talks down to his readers. This much
is probably true, as Tolkien repudiated his narrative stance
in The Hobbit within a very short time after it was published,
saying, “The Hobbit was written in what I should now regard
44
as bad style, as if one were talking to children. There’s nothing
my children loathed more. They taught me a lesson. Anything
that was in any way marked out in The Hobbit as for children,
instead of just for people, they disliked—instinctively. I did
too, now that I think about it.” However, there are other less
exceptionable practices in language use that as clearly mark The
Hobbit as a book intended for the young or the naive reader.
These are narrative characteristics which serve to illustrate for
the reader how literature is to be read, that is, how details of
action or description may be used as the basis for inference.
   Take, for example, the problem of characterization. One
learns early on in The Hobbit that qualities of character may be
surmised by looking closely at the kind of language the char-
acter uses. So Bilbo’s description of Gandalf’s fireworks, “They
used to go up like great lilies and snapdragons and laburnums
of fire and hang in the twilight all evening,” tells us something
of the way his mind works. But the narrator feels obliged to
help his reader draw that inference—“You will notice already
that Mr. Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe.”
   Similarly, the narrator does not quite trust his reader to
see or appreciate the significance of Bilbo’s decision to go
down the tunnel to the treasure trove of Smaug. Though the
description of the rumble and throb of Smaug’s snoring cre-
ates a sense of a hell fire waiting below, and though Bilbo’s
reluctance to enter the tunnel has been made clear, the nar-
rator adds, “Going on from there was the bravest thing he ever
did. The tremendous things that happened afterward were as
nothing compared to it. He fought the real battle in the tunnel,
alone, before he saw the danger that lay in wait.” Now, there
is nothing wrong with these descriptions or with the others
like them throughout the book. They are not exactly conde-
scending in tone, nor are they really stylistically inappropriate.
But they assume a very naive reader, one incapable of drawing
inferences or understanding symbolic meaning. They assume,
that is, a child.
   There are, as well, other language choices and attitudes
that show Tolkien was writing The Hobbit for a young audi-
ence and was manipulating the language in appropriate ways

                                                               45
for such a group. For example, the narrator assumes that the
reader will not be able to find his way around in any organiza-
tion more complicated than straight chronology. Thus he feels
obliged to take his reader by the hand when he does anything
sophisticated, such as using a flashback. So, when chapter 13
ends with Bilbo and the dwarves wondering what happened to
Smaug, chapter 14 begins by answering the question: “Now if
you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, you must go
back again to the evening when he smashed the door and flew
off in a rage, two days before.” That is as tidy an example of
steering a naive reader through a transition that makes use of a
sophisticated narrative device as one can imagine.
   It is then quite sure that The Hobbit is a children’s book, in
the sense that it was written with a childish or naive reader in
mind. But it does not logically follow, as many critics seem to
assume, that the book is unworthy of critical attention. Though
Tolkien later repudiated the technique of The Hobbit, he could
not (and would not have wanted to) deny that the work still
reflects the workings of his remarkably fertile mind, and that,
though the themes are treated in such a way as to be accessible
to children, they have enough significance and enough subtlety
of development to reward the attentive adult. Like other fairy
tales, The Hobbit is thematically concerned with the human
situation, not simply with childish ones.
   Hobbits, the avuncular narrator tells us, are little people,
about half our height. They have brown curly hair on their
heads and on their feet, though they do not have beards. They
are good-natured and sociable, appreciating their food and their
tobacco (which they call pipeweed) and preferring brightly col-
ored clothes, particularly vests. They are very shy outside their
own territory and, consequently, are almost never seen by “the
big folks,” as they call us. Whenever they hear one of the big
folks coming, they steal away silently through the fields and
woods of the Shire, the region of Middle-earth where they live.
   The hobbit is Bilbo Baggins, who, as he is sitting down to
tea one day, hears adventure knocking at his door. Thirteen
dwarves, led by Thorin, son of Thráin, King Under the Moun-
tain, have decided to return to the Lonely Mountain of their

46
ancestors to reclaim the treasure stolen from them by Smaug
the Dragon. For reasons Bilbo does not understand, the wizard
Gandalf has chosen him to accompany the dwarves and to help
them to recover the treasure. The Hobbit is the story of Bilbo’s
adventures with the dwarves, his role in recovering the trea-
sure, and his return to his comfortable hobbit hole.
   Thematically, The Hobbit is primarily concerned with
increasing maturity. As Bilbo travels with the dwarves through
adventures with trolls, goblins, and giant spiders, he changes
from a frightened, passive, ineffectual lover of domestic com-
fort to a brave, realistic, active planner of events who is willing
to take responsibility for himself and others.
   After being almost eaten by trolls (who are luckily out-
smarted by Gandalf), almost murdered by goblins, threat-
ened by a strange underground creature called Gollum (from
whose lair comes a magical ring that makes the wearer invis-
ible), rescued by eagles, and captured by giant spiders and
then by Wood-elves, the adventurers finally reach the Lonely
Mountain. Here Bilbo asserts his leadership and finds the
treasure, awakening the dragon’s wrath in the process. When
the rampaging dragon is killed by one of the men who live
along the lake at the base of the mountain, the dwarves think
their claim to the treasure is clear. However, men and elves
soon appear to claim a share, and war threatens to break
out. Bilbo steals the Arkenstone, the most famous and most
beautiful gem of the hoard, and gives it to the men to use as
a lever against Thorin’s claim of the whole treasure. In doing
so, he hopes to avert a disaster. His effort fails, however, and
men, dwarves, and elves are saved from shedding one anoth-
er’s blood only by the attack upon all of them by the goblins
and Wargs who wish to avenge the losses they suffered at the
hands of Thorin and Company earlier.
   When the battle is over, Bilbo knows the bitterness and joy
of heroic involvement in life. He returns home, quite a new
hobbit, both shunned and honored for his unusual involve-
ment in adventures: “He took to writing poetry and visiting the
elves; and though many shook their heads and touched their
foreheads and said ‘Poor old Baggins!’ and though few believed

                                                                47
any of his tales, he remained very happy to the end of his days,
and those were extraordinarily long.” One could hardly ask for
a more classic fairy-tale ending.
   Having said that The Hobbit is a book much akin to a fairy
tale, it would perhaps be a good idea to consider that statement
for a moment: What are the characteristics associated with
fairy tales? Fairy tales are stories that take place in a secondary
world—a world in which nature is alive in a nearly human way,
and the laws that govern man and nature are not the same as
those of the world we occupy. Thus, in the world of a fairy
tale, animals may talk, magic may happen, people may come
back to life, or live for extraordinarily long expanses of time.
The heroes of fairy tales tend to be the small and the weak—
youngest brothers or sisters, for example, or people who are
thought to be dullards. But they have virtues that allow them
to overcome the strong and the powerful—a good nature, or
a streak of kindness, or an amazing cunning quickness. In fairy
tales, good and evil tend to be presented in black and white,
although the distinction is more likely to be made on the basis
of what the hero needs psychologically than what the laws of
religion or property teach us. For example, in “Jack the Giant
Killer,” it is far more important to Jack’s story that he out-
smart the giant and his wife than that the rights of property be
respected, that is, that the giant retain possession of his golden
harp. The giant is clearly bad because he tries to keep Jack
from existing as an individual (by eating him), and in the eyes
of the fairy tale that is a more important crime than Jack’s theft,
which is part of his growing up.



BRIAN ROSEBURY ON THE NOVEL AS A TRANSITIONAL
               WORK IN TOLKIEN’S DEVELOPMENT

Tolkien’s first published work of fiction is in many respects a
dry run for The Lord of the Rings, though Tolkien of course did
not conceive it as such, and it is scarcely a fifth of the length
of the later work. Its hero Bilbo, like Frodo, is a hobbit who

48
becomes, only half-voluntarily, engaged in a quest: the recap-
ture of dwarves’ treasure, stolen by the dragon Smaug, who
now hoards it in the Lonely Mountain far off in the East. After
a leisurely opening at Bilbo’s home in Hobbiton, the narra-
tive is dominated by the journey to the Mountain (a series of
largely unconnected adventures), until in the final third of the
tale several of its threads come together in a relatively complex
political and moral entanglement. The dragon, aroused by the
intrusion of Bilbo and the dwarves, is killed after devastating
a nearby community of men, Lake-Town: and the competing
claims of dwarves, Lake-men and elves for compensation from
his hoard are fairly recognised only by Bilbo, who smuggles the
dwarves’ priceless Arkenstone into the Elvenking’s camp to be
used in bargaining. An attack by goblins (the ‘orcs’ of The Lord
of the Rings) unites the disputing parties just as war seems on
the point of breaking out. The dwarves’ leader, Thorin Oak-
enshield, is mortally wounded in the battle, and forgives the
‘traitor’ Bilbo before dying.

  ‘Farewell, good thief,’ he said. ‘I go now to the halls
  of waiting to sit beside my fathers, until the world is
  renewed. Since I leave now all gold and silver, and go
  where it is of little worth, I wish to part in friendship
  from you, and I would take back my words and deeds at
  the Gate.’
      Bilbo knelt on one knee filled with sorrow. ‘Farewell,
  King under the Mountain!’ he said. ‘This is a bitter
  adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold
  can amend it. Yet I am glad that I have shared in your
  perils—that has been more than any Baggins deserves.’
      ‘No!’ said Thorin. ‘There is more in you of good
  than you know, child of the kindly West. Some courage
  and some wisdom, blended in measure. If more of us
  valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it
  would be a merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave
  it now. Farewell!’
      Then Bilbo turned away, and he went by himself, and
  sat alone wrapped in a blanket, and whether you believe it

                                                               49
     or not, he wept until his eyes were red and his voice was
     hoarse. He was a kindly little soul. (The Hobbit, p. 243)

   As the close of this extract suggests, The Hobbit is somewhat
too consciously conceived as a children’s book: ‘whether you
believe it or not’ is typical of the fireside intimacies to which
the narrative is prone (and which Tolkien later regretted), and
the deliberately naif diction and syntax of this and the final sen-
tence seems to wrap Bilbo in a blanket of paternal tenderness.
The anti-acquisitive moral, too, is spelt out more carefully and
repeatedly than an adult reader, or possibly any reader, needs.
(These shortcomings are further proof that the 1938 essay ‘On
Fairy Stories’, with its vigorous rejection of any necessary asso-
ciation between children and fairy-tales, represents a turning-
point in Tolkien’s thinking.) Yet one reason that Thorin’s
words about food and cheer are superfluous is that the situa-
tion has a realistic moral tension that requires no underlining.
Bilbo has betrayed the dwarves for good reasons—because
Thorin’s obstinacy in defending the entire hoard threatens
futile slaughter—and their prior debt to him is much greater
than his to them, but he has nevertheless betrayed them, and
Thorin’s rage has been understandable. Bilbo’s remark about
his own deserts is a sufficient, though oblique, apology for his
‘treachery’; Thorin repents his covetousness, and each forgives
the other. The dialogue is effective because (as the occasion
surely demands) the forgiveness is expressed with a minimum
of explicit reference to the events which have divided them:
Thorin’s ‘good thief’ initiates this blend of bluntness and indi-
rection. (The allusion to the Gospels which some readers will
discern in these words is, so to speak, optional, or accidental:
the phrase describes Bilbo quite literally, especially as he has
been explicitly engaged by the dwarves as a ‘burglar’.) The style
of both characters’ declarations is at once elevated and laconic,
close to that of many dialogue passages in The Lord of the Rings
in which the hobbits or other speakers adapt their normal dis-
course to a formal or solemn occasion. The success of the epi-
sode depends upon the reader’s willingness to concentrate on
the thoroughly-imagined situation, to allow it to validate the

50
momentarily dignified language, and to extend a certain indul-
gence to the lapses into sententiousness or chattiness. Indeed,
this is true of the whole work.
    Catherine Stimpson calls it ‘a genial, attractive book. . . .
The whole narrative has the lilt and zest of fresh inspiration’.
But for Tolkien’s hostile critics, patting The Hobbit on the
head has become something of a tradition: the critic indicates
a benevolent receptiveness towards ‘fantasy’ (when confined
to the marginal world of children’s books) before proceeding
to ridicule the ambitious scale and implied adult readership of
The Lord of the Rings. It seems to me that, on the contrary, The
Hobbit is very uneven in inspiration, and flawed by inconsisten-
cies of tone and conception; that it is essentially a transitional
work, a stopping-off point on Tolkien’s creative journey from
the rudimentary forms of bedtime story-telling to the richly
‘realistic’ narrative of The Lord of the Rings, a journey that con-
verges in that work with the progressive abandonment of the
mannered archaism of the early mythical writings. So far from
being an accomplished success ‘on its own level’, The Hobbit is
an uneasy, if likeable, patchwork of accomplishments, blunders,
and tantalising promises of the Middle-earth to come.
    At one level, its most characteristic, The Hobbit functions
extremely effectively as an adventure story for children that
makes no particular bid for internal realism, or for emotional
or moral depth. The delightful opening chapter, in which Bilbo
is simply selected out of the blue as the burglar for the dwarves’
expedition, makes no attempt to disguise the deus ex machina
role of Gandalf in getting the adventure started. The thirteen
dwarves’ arrival at Bag End, in unannounced groups at more
or less regular intervals, is a stylised effect (a kind of burlesque
of the iterative structure of fairy-tale) which Tolkien is not
above repeating several chapters later. Bilbo’s wild shriek of
terror at Thorin’s remark that ‘all of us . . . may never return’
(p. 23) is a piece of comic business rather than a psychologically
credible response. Several subsequent episodes, such as the
encounter with three ill-bred trolls, or the battle with spiders,
whom Bilbo taunts with insulting names, are gripping enough
in a Disney-cartoon sort of way, but leave no impression of a

                                                                 51
serious encounter with evil: the villains lack a moral history
or distinctive motive, and the forces of good triumph through
superior guile, energy and luck. Each conflict is essentially
a battle of wits. Even Bilbo’s confrontation with Gollum by
his underground pool—rewritten for the 1951 second edi-
tion, to harmonise with The Lord of the Rings—is maintained
at this stylised level by the ritual of the Riddle-Game the two
characters play. Towards the end, as we have already seen, the
story modulates into a more serious key. But it concludes with
a conventional and unambiguous happy ending: Bilbo returns
to Bag End enriched, with memories and with gold. He has lost
nothing, except his spoons and his reputation for respectability.
    At times The Hobbit falls below, or rises above, this level.
The dialogue is often under-differentiated, with figures such
as Thorin and Gandalf lapsing intermittently into a bourgeois
banality more appropriate to Bilbo. There are occasional nar-
rative contrivances which revision could easily have disguised,
as when Dori tells Gandalf several things he knows already—
‘All of a sudden you gave one of your blinding flashes . . .
You shouted “Follow me everybody!”’ (p. 84)—for the ben-
efit of an eavesdropping Bilbo and an eavesdropping reader.
The humour sometimes cuts against, rather than functioning
within, the integrity of the fictional ‘history’: there is, for
example, a particularly incongruous and laboured joke about
the invention of golf (p. 24). The notion of ‘magic’, largely
avoided in The Lord of the Rings in favour of a putatively con-
sistent system of powers and ‘lore’, is too often invoked (some-
times in the vaguest terms) in the evident hope of lending
colour to a prosaic episode or passage.
    On the other hand, we find from the very beginning
glimpses of an exhilarating temporal and spatial scope. The
fifty-year-old Bilbo, we learn in the first chapter, ‘had appar-
ently settled down immovably’ at Bag End. Then, ‘by some
curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world,
when there was less noise and more green . . . Gandalf came
by’ (p. 13). Both sentences imply the untroubled enjoyment
of wide expanses of time, an impression reinforced by the pro-
longed, seemingly inconsequential conversation that follows.

52
  ‘Good morning!’ said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun was
  shining, and the grass was very green. But Gandalf looked
  at him from under long bushy eyebrows that stuck out
  further than the brim of his shady hat.
      ‘What do you mean by that?’ he said. ‘Do you wish
  me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning
  whether I want it or not; or that you feel good this
  morning; or that it is a morning to be good on?’
      ‘All of them at once,’ said Bilbo. ‘And a very fine
  morning for a pipe of tobacco out of doors, into the
  bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down and have
  a fill of mine! There’s no hurry, we have all the day before
  us!’ Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door, crossed
  his legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring of smoke that
  sailed up in the air without breaking and floated away
  over the Hill. (The Hobbit, p. 13)

   As for space, Bilbo ‘loved maps, and in his hall there hung
a large one of the Country Round with all his favourite walks
marked on it in red ink’ (p. 26). The many windows of Bag End
overlook Bilbo’s garden ‘and meadows beyond, sloping down
to the river’ (p. 11). For Bilbo and his neighbours the features
of the local landscape are simply ‘The Hill’, ‘The Water’, ‘The
Country Round’: beyond them is the wide blue yonder into
which only the reckless venture.
   Tolkien is, of course, in this opening chapter building a land
of heart’s desire by elaborating the fairy-tale formula ‘once
upon a time’, and adopting the perspective formed in child-
hood (but deeply embedded in adult consciousness) of the
world as concentric circles centred upon Home. As he observes
in ‘On Fairy Stories’,

  If a story says, ‘he climbed the hill and saw a river in the
  valley below’ . . . every hearer of the words will have his
  own picture, and it will be made out of all the hills and
  rivers and dales he has ever seen, but specially out of The
  Hill, The River, The Valley which were for him the first
  embodiment of the word.

                                                                 53
   The insight is not especially original. What is important
is the conviction with which the compositional project is car-
ried out. Through writing The Hobbit, initially for his own
children, Tolkien discovered not only the hobbit’s-eye-view
which humanised (if one can put it that way) his mythical
vision in The Lord of the Rings, but also the concretely imagined
Middle-earth of the later work, though he did not yet call it by
that name and though its realisation was as yet rudimentary.
The two qualities are in fact connected: the hobbits’ grateful
and unassuming pleasure in life, which gathers value and sig-
nificance as the narratives of The Hobbit and The Lord of the
Rings proceed, requires the texture of experience to be evoked
as compellingly as possible. That in turn requires a plain and
transparent, but flexible and sensuously alert, prose style. The
simple and direct, even at times naive and homespun, style of
The Hobbit was an indispensable rehearsal for the huge narra-
tive labour of The Lord of the Rings. The ‘old castles with an evil
look, as if they had been built by wicked people’ which Bilbo
sees on the ‘dreary hills’ of the Lone-lands (p. 34) may repre-
sent only the faintest inkling of Isengard or the tower of Minas
Morgul; but in phrases and sentences a paragraph later the
mature style can be seen beginning to emerge.



           HUMPHREY CARPENTER ON BILBO BAGGINS

[Tolkien’s] deep feeling that his real home was in the West
Midland countryside of England had, since his undergraduate
days, defined the nature of his scholarly work. The same
motives that had led him to study Beowulf, Gawain, and the
Ancrene Wisse now created a character that embodied every-
thing he loved about the West Midlands: Mr Bilbo Baggins,
the hobbit.
   We can see certain superficial precedents for this invention:
the Snergs, the name Babbitt, and in Tolkien’s own stories the
original four-foot Tom Bombadil and the tiny Timothy Titus.
But this does not tell us very much. The personal element is

54
far more revealing. In the story, Bilbo Baggins, son of the lively
Belladonna Took, herself one of the three remarkable daugh-
ters of the Old Took, descended also from the respectable and
solid Bagginses, is middle aged and unadventurous, dresses
in sensible clothes but likes bright colours, and has a taste for
plain food; but there is something strange in his character
that wakes up when the adventure begins. John Ronald Reuel
Tolkien, son of the enterprising Mabel Suffield, herself one of
the three remarkable daughters of old John Suffield (who lived
to be nearly a hundred), descended also from the respectable
and solid Tolkiens, was middle aged and inclined to pessimism,
dressed in sensible clothes but liked coloured waistcoats when
he could afford them, and had a taste for plain food But there
was something unusual in his character that had already mani-
fested itself in the creation of a mythology, and it now led him
to begin this new story.
    Tolkien himself was well aware of the similarity between
creator and creation. ‘I am in fact a hobbit,’ he once wrote, ‘in
all but size. I like gardens, trees, and unmechanized farmlands;
I smoke a pipe, and like good plain food (unrefrigerated), but
detest French cooking; I like, and even dare to wear in these
dull days, ornamental waistcoats. I am fond of mushrooms (out
of a field); have a very simple sense of humour (which even my
appreciative critics find tiresome); I go to bed late and get up
late (when possible). I do not travel much.’ And as if to empha-
sise the personal parallel, Tolkien chose for the hobbit’s house
the name ‘Bag End’, which was what the local people called his
Aunt Jane’s Worcestershire farm. Worcestershire, the county
from which the Suffields had come, and in which his brother
Hilary was at that time cultivating the land, is of all West Mid-
land counties The Shire from which the hobbits come; Tolkien
wrote of it: ‘Any corner of that county (however fair or squalid)
is in an indefinable way “home” to me, as no other part of the
world is.’ But the village of Hobbiton itself with its mill and
river is to be found not in Worcestershire but in Warwickshire,
now half hidden in the red-brick skirt of Birmingham but still
identifiable as the Sarehole where Ronald Tolkien spent four
formative years.

                                                               55
   The hobbits do not owe their origins merely to personal
parallels. Tolkien once told an interviewer: ‘The Hobbits are
just rustic English people, made small in size because it reflects
the generally small reach of their imagination—not the small
reach of their courage or latent power.’ To put it another way,
the hobbits represent the combination of small imagination
with great courage which (as Tolkien had seen in the trenches
during the First World War) often led to survival against all
chances. ‘I’ve always been impressed,’ he once said, ‘that we
are here, surviving, because of the indomitable courage of quite
small people against impossible odds.’
   In some ways it is wrong to talk of hobbits as the ‘missing
piece’ that was needed before the two sides of Tolkien’s imagi-
nation during the nineteen-twenties and thirties could meet
and fuse; at least chronologically wrong, because Tolkien
probably began to write The Hobbit quite early in this period.
It would be more accurate to say that not until the book was
finished and published—indeed not until he began to write
the sequel—did he realise the significance of hobbits, and see
that they had a crucial role to play in his mythology. In itself
The Hobbit began as merely another story for amusement.
Moreover it nearly suffered the fate of so many others and
remained unfinished.
   While we can see quite clearly why Tolkien began to write
the story, it proves impossible to say exactly when. The manu-
script gives no indication of date, and Tolkien himself was
unable to remember the precise origins of the book. In one
account he said: ‘I am not sure but I think the Unexpected
Party (the first chapter) was hastily written before 1935 but
certainly after 1930 when I moved to 20 Northmoor Road.’
Elsewhere he wrote: ‘On a blank leaf I scrawled “In a hole in
the ground there lived a hobbit”. I did not and do not know
why. I did nothing about it, for a long time, and for some
years I got no further than the production of Thror’s Map.
But it became The Hobbit in the early nineteen-thirties.’ This
recollection that there was a hiatus between the original idea
and the composition of the main body of the story is con-
firmed by a note that Tolkien scribbled on a surviving page

56
of the original Chapter One: ‘Only page preserved of the
first scrawled copy of The Hobbit which did not reach beyond
the first chapter.’ In 1937, shortly after the book was pub-
lished, Christopher Tolkien recorded (in his letter to Father
Christmas) this account of the book’s origins: ‘Daddy wrote it
ages ago, and read it to John, Michael and me in our Winter
“Reads” after tea in the evening; but the ending chapters were
rather roughly done, and not typed out at all; he finished it
about a year ago.’ And writing to his publishers during the
same year, Tolkien declared: ‘My eldest boy was thirteen
when he heard the serial. It did not appeal to the younger
ones who had to grow up to it successively.’
   These statements lead to the conclusion that the book was
begun in 1930 or 1931 (when John, the eldest boy, was thir-
teen); certainly there was a completed typescript in existence
(lacking only the final chapters) in time for it to be shown to
C. S. Lewis late in 1932. However John and Michael Tolkien
do not believe this to be the entire picture, for they have a clear
memory of certain elements in the story being told to them in
the study at 22 Northmoor Road, that is, before 1930. They
are not certain that what they were listening to at that time was
necessarily a written story: they believe that it may well have
been a number of impromptu tales which were later absorbed
into The Hobbit proper.
   The manuscript of The Hobbit suggests that the actual
writing of the main part of the story was done over a com-
paratively short period of time: the ink, paper, and handwriting
style are consistent, the pages are numbered consecutively, and
there are almost no chapter divisions. It would also appear that
Tolkien wrote the story fluently and with little hesitation, for
there are comparatively few erasures or revisions. Originally
the dragon was called ‘Pryftan’, the name ‘Gandalf’ was given
to the chief dwarf, and the wizard was called ‘Bladorthin’.
The dragon’s name was soon changed to ‘Smaug’, from the
Germanic verb smugan meaning ‘to squeeze through a hole’;
Tolkien called this ‘a low philological jest’. But the name
‘Bladorthin’ was retained for some time, and it was not until
the draft was well advanced that the chief dwarf was renamed

                                                                57
‘Thorin Oakenshield’ and the name ‘Gandalf’ (taken, like
all the dwarf-names, from the Elder Edda) was given to the
wizard, for whom it was eminently suitable on account of its
Icelandic meaning of ‘sorcerer-elf’ and hence ‘wizard’.
    The story began, then, merely for personal amusement.
Certainly Tolkien had at first no intention that the bourgeois
comfortable world of Bilbo Baggins would be related in any
way to the vast mythological landscape of The Silmarillion.
Gradually, however, elements from his mythology began to
creep in. Inevitably the dwarves suggested a connection, for
‘dwarves’ (spelt in that fashion) had played a part in the earlier
work; and when in the first chapter of The Hobbit the wizard
mentioned ‘the Necromancer’ there was a reference to the
legend of Beren and Lúthien. Soon it was apparent that the
journey of Bilbo Baggins and his companions lay across a
corner of that Middle-earth which had its earlier history chron-
icled in The Silmarillion. In Tolkien’s words this was ‘the world
into which Mr Baggins strayed’. And if the events of the new
story were clearly set long after those of The Silmarillion, then,
since the earlier chronicles recorded the history of the First and
Second Ages of Middle-earth, it appeared that The Hobbit was
to be a tale of the Third Age.
    ‘One writes such a story,’ said Tolkien, ‘out of the leaf-mould
of the mind’; and while we can still detect the shape of a few of
the leaves—the Alpine trek of 1911, the goblins of the ‘Curdie’
books of George Macdonald, an episode in Beowulf when a cup
is stolen from a sleeping dragon—this is not the essential point
of Tolkien’s metaphor. One learns little by raking through a
compost heap to see what dead plants originally went into it.
Far better to observe its effect on the new and growing plants
that it is enriching. And in The Hobbit the leaf-mould of Tolk-
ien’s mind nurtured a rich growth with which only a few other
books in children’s literature can compare.
    For it is a children’s story. Despite the fact that it had been
drawn into his mythology, Tolkien did not allow it to become
overwhelmingly serious or even adult in tone, but stuck to
his original intention of amusing his own and perhaps other
people’s children. Indeed he did this too consciously and

58
deliberately at times in the first draft, which contains a large
number of ‘asides’ to juvenile readers, remarks such as ‘Now
you know quite enough to go on with’ and ‘As we shall see in
the end’. He later removed many of these, but some remain
in the published text—to his regret, for he came to dislike
them, and even to believe that any deliberate talking down to
children is a great mistake in a story. ‘Never mind about the
young!’ he once wrote. ‘I am not interested in the “child” as
such, modern or otherwise, and certainly have no intention
of meeting him/her half way, or a quarter of the way. It is a
mistaken thing to do anyway, either useless (when applied to
the stupid) or pernicious (when inflicted on the gifted).’ But
when he wrote The Hobbit he was still suffering from what he
later called ‘the contemporary delusions about “fairy-stories”
and children’—delusions that not long afterwards he made a
conscious decision to renounce.
   The writing of the story progressed fluently until the pas-
sage not far from the end where the dragon Smaug is about
to die. Here Tolkien hesitated, and tried out the narrative in
rough notes—something he was often to do in The Lord of
the Rings but seems to have done only rarely in The Hobbit.
These notes suggest that Bilbo Baggins might creep into
the dragon’s lair and stab him. ‘Bilbo plunges in his little
magic knife,’ he wrote. ‘Throes of dragon. Smashes walls and
entrance to tunnel.’ But this idea, which scarcely suited the
character of the hobbit or provided a grand enough death for
Smaug, was rejected in favour of the published version where
the dragon is slain by the archer Bard. And then, shortly after
he had described the death of the dragon, Tolkien abandoned
the story.
   Or to be more accurate, he did not write any more of it
down. For the benefit of his children he had narrated an
impromptu conclusion to the story, but, as Christopher Tolkien
expressed it, ‘the ending chapters were rather roughly done,
and not typed out at all’. Indeed they were not even written in
manuscript. The typescript of the nearly finished story, made in
the small neat typeface of the Hammond machine, with italics
for the songs, was occasionally shown to favoured friends,

                                                             59
together with its accompanying maps (and perhaps already a
few illustrations). But it did not often leave Tolkien’s study,
where it sat, incomplete and now likely to remain so. The boys
were growing up and no longer asked for ‘Winter Reads’, so
there was no reason why The Hobbit should ever be finished.

                            *   *   *

One of the few people to be shown the typescript of The Hobbit
was a graduate named Elaine Griffiths, who had been a pupil
of Tolkien’s and had become a family friend. Upon his recom-
mendation she was engaged by the London publishers George
Allen & Unwin to revise Clark Hall’s translation of Beowulf, a
popular undergraduate ‘crib’. One day in 1936 (some time after
The Hobbit had been abandoned) a member of Allen & Unwin’s
staff came down to Oxford to see Elaine Griffiths about the
project. This was Susan Dagnall, who had read English at
Oxford at the same time as Elaine Griffiths and indeed knew
her well. From her she learnt of the existence of the unfinished
but remarkable children’s story that Professor Tolkien had
written. Elaine Griffiths suggested that Susan Dagnall should
go to Northmoor Road and try to borrow the typescript. Susan
Dagnall went, met Tolkien, asked for the typescript, and was
given it. She took it back to London, read it, and decided that
it was certainly worthy of consideration by Allen & Unwin. But
it stopped short just after the death of the dragon. She sent the
typescript back to Tolkien, asking him if he would finish it, and
preferably soon, so that the book could be considered for pub-
lication in the following year.
    Tolkien got down to work. On 10 August 1936 he wrote:
‘The Hobbit is now nearly finished, and the publishers
clamouring for it.’ He engaged his son Michael, who had cut
his right hand badly on a school window, to help with the
typing, using his left hand. The whole labour was finished by
the first week in October, and the typescript was sent to Allen
& Unwin’s offices near the British Museum, bearing the title
The Hobbit, or There and Back Again.


60
   The firm’s chairman, Stanley Unwin, believed that the best
judges of children’s books were children, so he handed The
Hobbit to his ten-year-old son Rayner, who read it and wrote
this report:

  Bilbo Baggins was a hobbit who lived in his hobbit-hole
  and never went for adventures, at last Gandalf the wizard
  and his dwarves perswaded him to go. He had a very
  exiting time fighting goblins and wargs. at last they got
  to the lonley mountain; Smaug, the dragon who gawreds
  it is killed and after a terrific battle with the goblins he
  returned home—rich! This book, with the help of maps,
  does not need any illustrations it is good and should
  appeal to all children between the ages of 5 and 9.

The boy earned a shilling for the report, and the book was
accepted for publication.
   Despite what Rayner Unwin had written, it was decided
that The Hobbit did need illustrations. Tolkien was modest
about his talents as an artist, and when at the publishers’ sug-
gestion he submitted a number of drawings which he had
made for the story he commented ‘The pictures seem to me
mostly only to prove that the author cannot draw.’ But Allen
& Unwin did not agree, and they gladly accepted eight of his
black and white illustrations.
   Although Tolkien had some idea of the processes involved
in the production of books, he was surprised by the number of
difficulties and disappointments during the following months;
indeed the machinations and occasionally the downright incom-
petence of publishers and printers continued to amaze him until
the end of his life. The Hobbit maps had to be redrawn by him
because his originals had incorporated too many colours, and
even then his scheme of having the general map as an endpaper
and Thror’s map placed within the text of Chapter One was not
followed. The publishers had decided that both maps should
be used as endpapers, and in consequence his plan for ‘invisible
lettering’, which would appear when Thror’s map was held up


                                                                 61
to the light, had to be abandoned. He also had to spend a good
deal of time on the proofs—though this was entirely his fault.
When the page-proofs arrived at Northmoor Road in February
1937 he decided that he ought to make substantial revisions
to several parts of the book, for he had let the manuscript go
without checking it with his usual thoroughness, and he was now
unhappy about a number of passages in the story; in particular he
did not like many of the patronising ‘asides’ to juvenile readers,
and he also saw that there were many inconsistencies in the
description of the topography, details which only the most acute
and painstaking reader would notice, but which he himself with
his passion for perfection could not allow to pass. In a few days
he had covered the proofs with a host of alterations. With typical
consideration for the printers he ensured that his revisions occu-
pied an identical area of type to the original wording—though
here he was wasting his time, for the printers decided to reset the
entire sections that he had revised.
   The Hobbit was published on 21 September 1937. Tolkien
was a little nervous of Oxford reaction, especially as he was
currently holding a Leverhulme Research Fellowship, and he
remarked: ‘I shall now find it very hard to make people believe
that this is not the major fruits of “research” 1936–7.’ He need
not have worried: at first Oxford paid almost no attention.
   A few days after publication the book received an accolade
in the columns of The Times. ‘All who love that kind of chil-
dren’s book which can be read and re-read by adults’, wrote
the reviewer, ‘should take note that a new star has appeared
in this constellation. To the trained eye some characters will
seem almost mythopoeic.’ The eye in question was that of C.
S. Lewis, at that time a regular reviewer for The Times Literary
Supplement, who had managed to get this notice of his friend’s
book into the parent journal. Naturally, he also reviewed the
book in glowing terms in the Supplement itself. There was an
equally enthusiastic reaction from many other critics, although
some took a delight in pointing out the ineptness of the pub-
lisher’s ‘blurb’ that compared the book to Alice in Wonderland
simply because both were the work of Oxford dons; and there
were a few dissenting voices, among them that of the reviewer

62
who wrote (somewhat puzzlingly) in Junior Bookshelf: ‘The cou-
rageous freedom of real adventure doesn’t appear.’
   The first edition of The Hobbit had sold out by Christmas.
A reprint was hurried through, and four of the five coloured
illustrations that Tolkien had drawn for the book were now
included in it; he had apparently never offered them to Allen &
Unwin, and it was not until they passed through the publisher’s
office on the way to Houghton Mifflin, who were to publish
the book in America, that their existence was discovered. When
the American edition was issued a few months later it too
received approbation from most critics, and it was awarded the
New York Herald Tribune prize for the best juvenile book of the
season. Stanley Unwin realised that he had a children’s best-
seller in his list. He wrote to Tolkien: ‘A large public will be
clamouring next year to hear more from you about Hobbits!’



                             PERRY C. BRAMLETT ON
               THE HOBBIT AS CHILDREN’S LITERATURE

Tolkien evidently did not have a high opinion of the Hobbit,
particularly after its publication (1937) and during the time
of his continued work on the Silmarillion and the writing and
publishing of the Lord of the Rings. In a December 1937 letter
to G. E. Selby he wrote: “I don’t much approve of the Hobbit
myself, preferring my own mythology . . . with its consistent
nomenclature . . . and organized history . . . to this rabble of
Eddaic-named dwarves . . .”1 In later correspondence with W.
H. Auden, Tolkien told the poet that the Hobbit was “unhap-
pily meant” as a children’s story and that it contained some
of the “silliness” of certain children’s books he had read in his
childhood. And in a draft of a letter (April 1959, never sent) he
said that the Hobbit was “published hurriedly and without due
consideration,” and was not addressed specifically to children
as an audience, but came out of his made-up stories for his own
children. He further added that the Hobbit was a “first essay or
introduction” to the Lord of the Rings.2

                                                              63
   And he remembered only some of its origins: “All I can
remember about the start of the Hobbit is sitting correcting
School Certificate papers in the everlasting weariness of that
annual task forced on impecunious academics with children.
On a blank leaf I scrawled: ‘In a hole in the ground there lived
a hobbit.’”3 Tolkien could not remember exactly when he wrote
these words, although once he said it was after 1930. But his
eldest sons John and Michael remembered hearing parts of the
story read to them and their younger brother Christopher by
their father between 1926–1930, and Michael wrote imitation
hobbit stories (“apocryphal Hobbitry”) that he dated 1929. He
later guessed that his father started writing the story sometime
between the summer of 1928 and continued it into 1929. John
later told the BBC that his father read to them parts of the
story for several Christmases, and Christopher remembered
hearing it read to the boys in their winter “reads” after tea in
the evening.4
   Enough of the story had been written by late 1932 or early
1933 that Tolkien showed it to C. S. Lewis. In an early 1933
letter to his friend Arthur Greeves, Lewis mentioned that he
had delighted in reading it, that it was “good” except the end
(Lewis’s version did not have Tolkien’s later added chapters),
and that there was a question to whether or not the story
would succeed with “modern children.” Tolkien’s former stu-
dent Elaine Griffiths remembered Tolkien lending her an
early typed copy of the Hobbit, and that she read it with “enor-
mous pleasure” and thought it was wonderful. In 1936, when
she worked for Allen & Unwin, Griffiths, while working on
a translation of Beowulf, was visited in Oxford by her friend
Susan Dagnall, who also worked for the publisher. Griffiths
recommended the Hobbit to Dagnall, who met Tolkien and
took a borrowed copy of the story back to London.
   Dagnall read and approved the story, then returned it to
Tolkien, suggesting that he finish it (the incomplete story ended
with the death of the dragon) and submit it for publication in
1937. Tolkien finished the story in late September 1936, and
sent it to Allen & Unwin on 3 October. Stanley Unwin gave the
manuscript to his ten-year-old son Raynor for review, for the

64
standard fee of one shilling. Young Rayner liked the story, and
a sentence from his review is worth noting: “He (Bilbo Baggins)
had a very exciting time fighting goblins and wargs. At last they
got to the lonely mountain; Smaug, the dragon who gawreds it
is killed and after a terrific battle with the goblins he returned
home—rich!”5 Rayner thought the story was “good,” did not
need any illustrations, and thought it would be enjoyed by all
children between the ages of five and nine.
    Allen & Unwin’s production department had some dif-
ficulties with the five maps planned for the book, and after
discussion with Tolkien, they asked him to design them, with
two eventually being used, Thror’s Map and the Wilder land
(Marched) Map. After much discussion, many letters back
and forth from Unwin and Tolkien, and several revisions, the
British first edition of the Hobbit was published on 21 Sep-
tember 1937, with an initial printing of 1,500 copies, 150 of
these review and sample copies. The book’s complete title was
the Hobbit or There and Back Again Being the Record of a Years
Journey Made by Bilbo Baggins of Hobbiton Compiled from his
Memoirs. It included “Thror’s Map” (front endsheets), “Wilder
land” (back endsheets), and ten additional illustrations by
Tolkien: “The Hill: Hobbiton Across the Water,” “The Trolls,”
“The Mountain-path,” “The Misty Mountains Looking
West from the Eyrie towards Goblin’s Gate,” “Beorn’s Hall,”
“Marched” (color), “The Elvenking’s Gate,” “Lake Town,”
“The Front Gate,” and “The Hall at Bag-End, Residence of B.
Baggins Esquire.” Tolkien also designed the dust jacket (with
several revisions) and drew the designs for the cover, which
included dragons, mountains, moon, runes, and sun.
    Tolkien wrote a descriptive blurb for the British edition, and
part of it read, “If you care for journeys there and back, out of
the comfortable Western world, over the edge of the Wild, and
home again, and can take an interest in a humble hero (blessed
with a little wisdom and a little courage and considerable good
luck), here is the record of such a journey and such a traveler
. . . you will learn by the way . . . much about trolls, goblins,
dwarves, and elves, and get some glimpses into the history and
politics of a neglected but important period.”6

                                                               65
   He received his advance copy of the book on 13 August
1937, it was published on 21 September, and the first printing
was sold out by 15 December. A second printing of 2,300
copies was released on 25 January 1938 and sold out quickly,
although over 400 copies of these (in sheets) were destroyed
in warehouse by Hitler’s bombs. The first US edition was pub-
lished by Houghton Mifflin (Boston) on 1 March 1938, by June
nearly 3,000 copies had been sold, and by the end of 1938 over
5,000 copies had been sold.
   By 1947 the British edition was in its fourth impression, by
1991 it was reported that annual sales had reached 100,000
copies, and the 1992 centenary printing of 80,000 copies was
sold out before publication. Since 1937, and after the success
of the Lord of the Rings, the Hobbit has been reprinted scores
of times by several publishers, in paperback, anniversary, chil-
dren’s, special, “gift,” and even comic editions, and estimates
of its sales to the present day have approached fifty million
copies worldwide. It has been translated into over twenty-five
languages, including Swedish (the first, 1947), Hebrew, French,
Estonian, Bulgarian, Japanese, and Dutch.
   After Tolkien submitted his Hobbit manuscript to Allen
and Unwin, an editor there complained about his spelling of
“dwarves,” and pointed out that the OED spelled it “dwarfs.”
Tolkien’s reply was: “I wrote the Oxford English Dictionary!”7
This must not have helped, because the first British paperback
edition (Puffin, 1961) contained several notable misprints,
including “dwarves” and “elvish” being changed to “dwarfs”
and “elfish.”8 Ballantine (a Houghton Mifflin imprint), which
published the first US paperback edition (1965), did not
include Tolkien’s revisions or consult him about the design of
the dust jacket.
   Most of the early reviews were good, with many reviewers
comparing the Hobbit to Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland and
Through the Looking-Glass. C. S. Lewis reviewed the book twice
anonymously, in the 2 October 1937 issue of the Times Literary
Supplement, and in the 8 October 1937 issue of the Times. In
the first review, he wrote that the Hobbit “may well prove to
be a classic,” and in the second he said that Tolkien had united

66
several things, including humor, an understanding of children,
and “a happy fusion of the scholar’s with the poet’s grasp of
mythology.” In the United States, Anne Eaton reviewed the
Hobbit for the New York Times Book Review and Horn Book
Magazine and said the work was “written with a quiet humor
and the logical detail in which children take delight.” Wil-
liam R. Bent, writing for Saturday Review of Literature, called
the Hobbit “a gorgeous fancy.” In May of 1938 the New York
Herald Tribune awarded the book a $250 prize in an annual
children’s festival, calling it the best book published that spring
for younger children. Sinclair Lewis’s young son Michael (aged
seven) called the Hobbit “an adorable story” (for an advertising
blurb for Houghton Mifflin), and Tolkien provided a drawing
of a hobbit for Houghton Mifflin’s fall advertising push, which
was printed in the Christmas edition of Horn Book Magazine.
   Tolkien did not plan for the Hobbit to have a sequel. When
the Lord of the Rings was nearing its completion in 1947, he
understood that he would have to change the account of how
Bilbo obtained the Ring, as in the original version the ring had
magical powers but was not the Ring of Power, the One Ring.
Tolkien then revised parts of chapter five of the Hobbit to show
that Gollum planned to kill Bilbo from the beginning, and that
his ring was the One Ring. This revised version was published
in the second edition of the Hobbit in 1951, along with a note
from Tolkien explaining that this version was “the true story”
that Bilbo eventually told Gandalf. . . .
   . . . In January 1938, the London Observer published a letter
asking Tolkien to tell his readers more about hobbits and sug-
gesting that he might have been influenced by an article by
Julian Huxley, which described “little furry men” seen in Africa
by natives and “at least one scientist.” The letter also men-
tioned an old (1904) fairy tale called “The Hobbit,” and asked
if the cup-stealing scene in Tolkien’s tale was from Beowulf.
Tolkien responded with a long letter, explaining that he had
no recollection from his reading about “furry pigmies” in
Africa, nor of the hobbit fairy tale. He protested that his hob-
bits did not live in Africa, had fur only on their feet, and that
the two hobbits in the Observer were “accidental homophones”

                                                                67
(a word having the same sound as another but meaning some-
thing quite different). Tolkien went on to say that he did not
remember anything about the name and inception of Bilbo (the
hero), and that he would leave the game of guessing the ori-
gins of hobbits to “future researchers.”11 Years later, he told an
interviewer that the word hobbit might have been derived from
Sinclair Lewis’s Babbitt (1922). Tolkien had evidently read the
novel, as he commented that “Babbitt has the same bourgeois
smugness that hobbits do.”12
   There have been several other theories about the origin of
hobbits. In British folklore there are several examples of cer-
tain wraiths and elves called hobs, hobthrusts (a good-natured
goblin or “local spirit, famous for whimsical pranks”), and
hobyahs, while hob is an old word for “rustic” or “clown,” and
a hoball or hoblob or hobbil or hob-hald is a “clown” or “fool.”13
Tom Shippey mentioned a collection of folklore tales called
the Denham Tracts that describe supernatural creatures, written
by Michael A. Denham and edited by Dr. James Hardy, which
were published in two volumes in 1892 and 1895. In volume
two, the word hobbit is mentioned as a “class of spirit.”14 Tolk-
ien’s hobbits were certainly not “spirits,” and he could have
known about them from the Denham book, but we will prob-
ably never know. In 1977, a Tolkien journal stated that the
London Times reported (6 May 1977) that the word hobbit had
been found in a 1586 catalogue of “hobgoblins, boggarts, and
other fantastic creatures.”15

Notes
   1. Christopher Tolkien, ed., The Return of the Shadow (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1988) 7.
   2. Humphrey Carpenter, The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien (London:
Allen & Unwin, 1981) 297–98.
   3. Ibid., 215.
   4. Humphrey Carpenter puts the date in 1930 or 1931, stating
that the version of the story the boys heard may have been have
been oral, or “impromptu tales.” See J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2000) 181. This was verified by Tolkien
in a letter dated 16 July 1964, when he said he invented and told
stories to his children and sometimes wrote them down. See
Carpenter, Letters, 346.

68
   5. Wayne G. Hammond, J. R. R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography
(New Castle DE: Oak Knoll Books, 1993) 8.
   6. Douglas A. Anderson, The Annotated Hobbit (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1988) 3.
   7. Deborah Rogers quoted with approval an anecdote from Daniel
Grotta-Kurska’s usually unreliable biography (93). See Rogers,
Tolkien: A Critical Biography (New York: Hippocrene Books, 1980) 20,
128. The 1933 edition of the OED (vol. 3, p. 732) defined dwarf as
“one of a supposed race of diminutive beings, who figure in Teutonic
and esp. Scandinavian mythology and folklore; often identified with
the elves . . .”
   8. This would happen to Tolkien again, with the publication of the
Lord of the Rings.
   11. See Carpenter, Letters, 30–32.
   12. See Anderson, Annotated Hobbit, 5.
   13. From the 1933 edition of the Oxford English Dictionary.
   14. See Shippey, J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century (London:
HarperCollins, 2000) 3.
   15. Mythprint 15/5 (June 1977): 1. Mythlore 16 (vol. 4, no. 4, June
1977) inside back page.



                                COLIN DURIEZ ON PHYSICAL
                                  AND SPIRITUAL JOURNEYS

On a summer’s day around the end of the 1920s a slight man—
indistinct in contrast to the brightness outside—sits by an open
window at his desk, a pen in hand, a Toby Jug sprouting pipes
and a wooden tobacco jar nearby. A slant of sun touches him. His
hair is so fine that the light makes the crown of his head shine.
The comparative gloom of the study is emphasized by an abun-
dance of dark-bound books—books lining the walls of the room
from floor to ceiling, books even creating the sides of a tunnel
through which one enters the study, shelves protruding out-
wards on either side of the door. The man is silent, except for an
occasional muttered “O lor,” reluctantly concentrating upon the
task in hand. For beside him are two piles of papers. The larger
is made up of unmarked school certificate exam papers. The
smaller pile is made up of the already marked ones. Abandoned
sheets of elegant manuscript perch on the edge of the desk.

                                                                   69
   Tolkien, like Lewis, undertakes the seasonal task of grading
papers to supplement his meager university income. Both have
households to support. Tolkien would rather be working on
his poetic version of “The Tales of Beren and Lúthien Elf-
maiden,” teasing out some detail of the chronology of the First
Age of Middle-earth, or checking out the origin and formation
in an Elven variant of the name of a particular character who
has sprung, unbidden, into the story.
   This particular summer’s day seems likely to be uneventful,
as many before it. There are the familiar sounds of his boys
playing in the garden, and the undeniable mountain of scripts
to be evaluated before his voluntary imprisonment is over. All
changes, however, when Tolkien turns over a page and, instead
of a hastily written answer, finds it blank. This is joy indeed.
One of the candidates, mercifully it seems to him, has left one
of the folios with no writing on it. Tolkien hesitates a moment,
then inscribes boldly across the sheet: “In a hole in the ground
there lived a hobbit.” As always, names generate a story in his
mind. Eventually he decides that he had better find out what
these mysterious hobbits are like.

                            *   *   *

By late 1932 Tolkien was able to hand Lewis a sheaf of papers
to read. It was the incomplete draft of what became The Hobbit:
or There and Back Again. Lewis described his reaction to it in
a letter to Arthur Greeves: “Reading his fairy tale has been
uncanny—it is so exactly like what we would both have longed
to write (or read) in 1916: so that one feels he is not making it
up but merely describing the same world into which all three
of us have the entry.” Lewis had already written to Greeves
in rosiest terms of his friendship with Tolkien, comparing it
favorably with their own—like them, Lewis said, he had grown
up on William Morris and George MacDonald. In a letter
a few weeks later he mentions Tolkien sharing their love of
“romance” literature, and in the same sense: “He agreed that
for what we meant by romance there must be at least the hint
of another world—one must hear the horns of elfland.”

70
   The Hobbit was eventually published on September 21, 1937,
complete with Tolkien’s own illustrations; the initial printing
was fifteen hundred copies. W. H. Auden, when he reviewed
The Fellowship of the Ring for the New York Times on October
31, 1954, wrote: “in my opinion, [The Hobbit] is one of the best
children’s stories of this century.”
   Though Tolkien probably began writing the book in 1930,
his eldest sons, John and Michael, remembered the story
being told to them before the 1930s. Perhaps various oral
forms of the story merged into the more finished written draft.
What is significant from these indistinct memories is that The
Hobbit began as a tale told by a father to his children. It was
consciously written as a children’s story, and this fact shapes
its style. It also seems that at first the story was independent
of Tolkien’s burgeoning mythological cycle, “The Silmaril-
lion,” and was only later incorporated into his invented world
and history. The tale introduced hobbits into Middle-earth,
dramatically affecting the course of events there. The Hobbit
belongs to the Third Age of Middle-earth, and chronologically
precedes The Lord of the Rings.
   At the time of publication Lewis reviewed his friend’s book
for The Times Literary Supplement: “Prediction is dangerous:
but The Hobbit may well prove a classic.” Another critic, in
the New Statesman, remarked of Tolkien: “It is a triumph that
the genus Hobbit, which he himself has invented, rings just as
real as the time-hallowed genera of Goblin, Troll, and Elf.”
Lewis believed that the hobbits “are perhaps a myth that only
an Englishman (or, should we add, a Dutchman?) could have
created.” Instead of a creation of character as we find it in stan-
dard novels, much of the personality of Bilbo, Frodo, and Sam
derives from their character as hobbits, just as we identify Gan-
dalf in character as a wizard or Treebeard as an Ent. Tolkien
sustains the collective qualities of these different mythological
species with great skill.
   The title of The Hobbit refers to its unlikely hero, Mr. Bilbo
Baggins. He is a creature of paradox, summed up in his oxy-
moronic role as a bourgeois burglar in the story. Before Bilbo,
hobbits aimed at having a good reputation with their peers—not

                                                                71
only by being comfortably off, but by not having any adven-
tures or doing anything unexpected. Bilbo’s house was a typical
dwelling place of a wealthy hobbit. It was not a worm-filled,
dirty, damp hole, but a comfortable, many-roomed underground
home. Its hall, which connected all the rooms, had “panelled
walls, and floors tiled and carpeted, provided with polished
chairs, and lots and lots of pegs for hats and coats—the hobbit
was fond of visitors.” Hobbits generally liked to be thought
respectable, not having adventures or behaving in an unexpected
way. They were lifted from Tolkien’s childhood world of the
rural West Midlands, the inspiration for The Shire.
    Bilbo’s reputation is tarnished forever when he is suddenly
caught up in the quest for dragon’s treasure. He reluctantly
finds this more congenial than he ever thought. A whole new
world is opened up to him, and in later years he even becomes
somewhat of a scholar, translating and retelling tales from the
older days. The quest also develops his character, though he
always retains the quality of homeliness associated with hobbits
and The Shire where they live.
    In The Hobbit a party of dwarves, thirteen in number, are on
a quest for their long-lost treasure, which is jealously guarded
by the dragon, Smaug. Their leader is the great Thorin Oak-
enshield. They employ Bilbo Baggins as their master burglar to
steal the treasure, at the recommendation of the wizard Gan-
dalf the Grey. At first the reluctant Mr. Baggins would rather
spend a quiet day with his pipe and pot of tea in his comfort-
able hobbit-hole than partake in any risky adventure.
    But as their journey unfolds, the dwarves become increas-
ingly thankful for the fact that they employed him, despite ini-
tial misgivings, as he gets them out of many scrapes. He seems
to have extraordinary luck. At one point in the adventure Bilbo
is knocked unconscious in a tunnel under the Misty Mountains,
and left behind in the darkness by the rest of the party.
    Reviving, Bilbo discovers a ring lying beside him in the
tunnel. It is the ruling ring, the One Ring, that would eventually
form the subject of The Lord of the Rings, but at this stage Bilbo
is to discover only its magical property of invisibility. After put-
ting the ring in his pocket, Bilbo stumbles along the dark tunnel.

72
Eventually, he comes across a subterranean lake, where Gollum
dwells, a living vestige of a hobbit, his life preserved over centu-
ries by the ring he has now lost for the first time. After a battle of
riddles, Bilbo escapes, seemingly by luck, by slipping on the ring.
Following the vengeful Gollum, who cannot see him, he finds
his way out of the mountains, on the other side.
   After the encounter with Gollum, the plucky Bilbo eventu-
ally leads the party successfully to the dragon’s treasure, and
the scaly monster perishes while attacking nearby Lake-town.
Bilbo and Gandalf in the end journey back to the peaceful
Shire—they have gone “there and back again.” Bilbo decides to
refuse most of his share of the treasure, having seen the results
of greed. The events have in fact changed him forever, but even
more, the ring he secretly possesses will shape the events even-
tually to be recorded in The Lord of the Rings.



                    TOM SHIPPEY ON SOURCES, ORIGINS,
                          AND MODERNIZING THE PAST

The next point is that Tolkien did admit one possible source
in Sinclair Lewis’s novel Babbitt (1922), the story of the near-
disgrace and abortive self-discovery of a complacent American
businessman; to this theme the journey and the nature of Bilbo
Baggins show some correspondence. But the source that Tolkien
emphatically rejected is the word ‘rabbit’, of which so many
critics have been reminded. ‘Calling Bilbo a “nassty little rabbit”
was a piece of vulgar trollery’, he wrote, ‘just as “descendant of
rats” was a piece of dwarfish [sic] malice’ (Observer, 20 February
1938). ‘Certainly not rabbit,’ he affirmed later. Internal evidence
runs against him here, however, for it is not only the trolls who
think simultaneously of Bilbo and rabbits. Bilbo makes the
comparison himself in chapter 6 of The Hobbit, when he sees
the eagle sharpening its beak and begins ‘to think of being torn
up for supper like a rabbit’. Three pages later the same thought
occurs to the eagle: ‘You need not be frightened like a rabbit,
even if you look rather like one.’ Thorin shakes Bilbo ‘like a

                                                                   73
rabbit’ in chapter 16, and much earlier Beorn—admittedly a
rude and insensitive character—pokes Mr Baggins in the waist-
coat and observes ‘little bunny is getting nice and fat again’ (p.
144). He is in a sense repaying the insult Bilbo offered earlier (p.
127), when he thought Beorn’s ‘skin-changing’ meant he was ‘a
furrier, a man that calls rabbits conies, when he doesn’t turn their
skins into squirrels’. But the multiplicity of names gives a further
clue to Tolkien’s real thoughts, incubating since 1915 and the
neologism ‘coney-rabbits’ in ‘Goblin Feet’.
   The fact is that ‘rabbit’ is a peculiar word. The OED can
find no ultimate etymology for it, nor trace it back in English
before 1398. ‘Coney’ or ‘cunny’ is little better, going back to
1302, while ‘bunny’ is a pet-name used originally for squirrels,
as it happens, and not recorded till the seventeenth century.
The words for ‘rabbit’ differ in several European languages
(French lapin, German kaninchen), and there is no Old English
or Old Norse word for it at all. These facts are unusual: ‘hare’,
for instance, is paralleled by Old English hara, German hase,
Old Norse heri, and so on, while the same could be said for
‘weasel’ or ‘otter’ or ‘mouse’ or ‘brock’ or most other familiar
mammals of Northern Europe. The reason, of course, is that
rabbits are immigrants. They appeared in England only round
the thirteenth century, as imported creatures bred for fur, but
escaped to the wild like mink or coypu. Yet they have been assimi-
lated. The point is this: not one person in a thousand realises
that rabbits (no Old English source) are in any historical way
distinct from mice (O.E. mýs) or weasels (O.E. weselas), while
the word is accepted by all as familiar, native, English. The
creature has further established itself irreversibly in the folk-
imagination, along with wise owls (O.E. úlan) and sly foxes
(O.E. fuhsas). But if an Anglo-Saxon or Norseman had seen one
he would have thought it alien, if not bizarre. Rabbits prove
that novelties can be introduced into a language and then made
to fit—of course as long as one exhibits due regard to deep
structures of language and thought. ‘If a foreign word falls by
chance into the stream of a language’, wrote Jacob Grimm, ‘it
is rolled around till it takes on that language’s colour, and in
spite of its foreign nature comes to look like a native one.’

74
   Now this situation of anachronism-cum-familiarity certainly
has something to do with hobbits. The first time that Bilbo
Baggins appears in close focus he is ‘standing at his door after
breakfast smoking an enormous long wooden pipe’. Smoking
later appears as not just a characteristic of hobbits, but virtually
the characteristic, ‘the one art that we can certainly claim to
be our own invention’, declares Meriadoc Brandybuck (LOTR,
p. 8). But what are they smoking besides pipes? ‘Pipeweed, or
leaf ’, declares the Lord of the Rings Prologue firmly. Why not
say ‘tobacco’, since the plant is ‘a variety probably of Nico-
tiana’? Because the word would sound wrong. It is an import
from some unknown Caribbean language via Spanish, reaching
English only after the discovery of America, sometime in the
sixteenth century. The words it resembles most are ‘potato’
and ‘tomato’, also referring to new objects from America,
eagerly adopted in England and naturalised with great speed,
but marked off as foreign by their very phonetic structure.
‘Pipeweed’ shows Tolkien’s wish to accept a common feature of
English modernity, which he knew could not exist in the ancient
world of elves or trolls, and whose anachronism would instantly
be betrayed by a word with the foreign feel of ‘tobacco’. Actu-
ally Bilbo does use ‘tobacco’ on page 14 of The Hobbit, and Gan-
dalf mentions ‘tomatoes’ not much later. In the first edition. The
third changes ‘cold chicken and tomatoes’ to ‘cold chicken and
pickles’,” and after that the foreign fruit is excluded. ‘Potatoes’
stay in, being indeed the speciality of Gaffer Gamgee, but his
son Sam has a habit of assimilating the word to the more native-
sounding ‘taters’—Tolkien notes elsewhere that the word was
borrowed into colloquial Welsh from colloquial English as
tatws, in which form it sounds much less distinctive (‘EW’, p.
34). But in fact the scene in which Sam discusses ‘taters’ with
Gollum (LOTR, p. 640) is a little cluster of anachronisms: hob-
bits, eating rabbits (Sam calls them ‘coveys’), wishing for pota-
toes (‘taters’) but out of tobacco (‘pipeweed’). One day, offers
Sam to Gollum, he might cook him something better—‘fried
fish and chips’. Nothing could now be more distinctively Eng-
lish! Not much would be less distinctively Old English. The
hobbits, though, are on our side of many cultural boundaries.

                                                                 75
   That, then, is their association with rabbits. One can see why
Tolkien denied the obvious connection between the two: he
did not want hobbits classified as small, furry creatures, vaguely
‘cute’ just as fairies were vaguely ‘pretty’. On the other hand
both insinuated themselves, rabbits into the homely company
of fox and goose and hen, hobbits into the fantastic but equally
verbally authenticated set of elves and dwarves and orcs and
ettens. One might go so far as to say that the absence of rab-
bits from ancient legend made them not an ‘asterisk word’ but
an ‘asterisk thing’—maybe they were there but nobody noticed.
That is exactly the ecological niche Tolkien selected for hobbits,
‘an unobtrusive but very ancient people’ (LOTR, p. 1, my italics). It
is not likely that this role was devised for them before the arrival
of the inspired ‘In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit’,
any more than the etymology from holbytla. Still, the amazing
thing about that sentence, looking back, is the readiness with
which it responded to development. The first half of it helped to
anchor hobbits in history, via holbytlan, the second to characterise
them in fiction, via the anachronisms associated with the rabbit-
analogy. Such complexity could be the result of prior uncon-
scious cogitation or later artistic effort. Either way, ‘hobbit’ as
word and concept threw out its anchors into Old and modern
English at once: ‘grammarye’ at work once more.

                       Breaking Contact
This preamble makes it easier to say what Tolkien was doing in
The Hobbit. Like Walter Scott or William Morris before him,
he felt the perilous charm of the archaic world of the North,
recovered from bits and scraps by generations of inquiry. He
wanted to tell a story about it simply, one feels, because there
were hardly any complete ones left; Beowulf or The Saga of
King Heidrek stimulated the imagination but did not satisfy it.
Accordingly he created a sort of ‘asterisk-world’ for the Norse
Elder Edda. The dwarf-names of ‘Thorin and Company’, as
well as Gandalf’s, come from a section of the Eddic poem
Völuspá, often known as the Dvergatal or ‘Dwarves’ Roster’.
This is not much regarded now, and has been called a ‘rigma-
role’, a meaningless list; The Hobbit implies, though, that that

76
meaningless list is the last faded memento of something once
great and important, an Odyssey of the dwarves. As for the
landscape through which Gandalf, Thorin and the rest move,
that too is an Eddic one; ‘the pathless Mirkwood’ is mentioned
in several poems, while ‘the Misty Mountains’ come from the
poem Skirnismál, where Freyr’s page, sent to abduct the giant’s
daughter, says grimly to his horse:

  ‘Myrct er úti, mál gveð ec ocr fara
    úrig fiöll yfir
    Þyrsa pbióð yfir;
  báðir við komomc, eða ocr báða tecr
    sá inn ámátki iotunn.

  ‘The mirk is outside, I call it our business to fare over the
  misty mountains, over the tribes of orcs (Þyrs = orc; . . .);
  we will both come back, or else he will take us both, he
  the mighty giant.’

All that Tolkien has done, in a way, is to make place-names out
of adjectives, to turn words into things.
   But there is one very evident obstacle to recreating the
ancient world of heroic legend for modern readers, and that lies
in the nature of heroes. These are not acceptable anymore, and
tend very strongly to be treated with irony: the modern view of
Beowulf is John Gardner’s novel Grendel (1971). Tolkien did not
want to be ironic about heroes, and yet he could not eliminate
modern reactions. His response to the difficulty is Bilbo Bag-
gins, the hobbit, the anachronism, a character whose initial role
at least is very strongly that of mediator. He represents and often
voices modern opinions, modern incapacities: he has no impulses
towards revenge or self-conscious heroism, cannot ‘hoot twice
like a barn-owl and once like a screech owl’ as the dwarves sug-
gest, knows almost nothing about Wilderland, and cannot even
skin a rabbit, being used to having his meat ‘delivered by the
butcher all ready to cook’. Yet he has a place in the ancient world
too, and there is a hint that (just like us) all his efforts cannot
keep him entirely separate from the past.

                                                                  77
                 JAUME ALBERO POVEDA ON NARRATIVE
                        MODELS IN TOLKIEN’S FICTION

It seems that, in spite of the illusion of progress, human beings
have undergone little inward change. Because of this, present-
day readers are still fascinated by the stories and narrative
motifs that our ancestors created and dispersed. So, the success
of books such as Harry Potter, Philip Pullman’s trilogy His Dark
Materials, and also J.R.R. Tolkien’s fantasy of Middle-earth,
which captivate the imagination of children and teenagers,
owes much to the motifs and elements that have characterized
literature across the ages.
    The Hobbit is a story Tolkien wrote to tell to his sons at
night. When he began writing The Lord of the Rings, his sons
were grown up and did no longer want bedtime stories. We
agree with Humphrey Carpenter (1977: 200) on the idea that
The Hobbit is a children’s story, although it has been integrated
into a mythology intended for a more adult reader and was
written in a more serious tone. The author’s original idea
when writing the story of Bilbo was for it to be entertaining
and amusing for his first audience, his sons. This work does
not aspire to achieve the emotional and moral intensity of The
Lord of the Rings. The title of the book The Hobbit, or, There and
Back Again declares an uninhibited narrative tone. The literary
style is indeed very relaxed and the work has a great structural
simplicity. Only in the battle of the Five Armies episode do the
details of the troops’ movement take on the sophistication of
modern warfare and the devotion of the participants reaches
an epic height. Tolkien’s short fiction has maintained the light
style characteristic of The Hobbit.
    The narrator of Bilbo’s story is omniscient, frequently dis-
cusses the events described and constantly speaks to the reader
as if to a child. As early as the first paragraphs we read: “He may
have lost the neighbours’ respect, but he gained—well, you will
see whether he gained anything in the end” (H, 16).1 The nar-
rator’s knowledge about the elements of the story is superior to
that of the characters. In this way, when Bilbo finds the Ring,

78
the narrator comments: “It was a turning point in his career,
but he did not know it” (H, 76). Or we can also read “Now, if
you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, you must go
back again to the evening when he smashed the door and flew
off in rage, two days before” (H, 234). The narrator is aware of
the reader’s cognitive universe. Therefore, he can predict the
reader’s reactions: “The mother of our particular Hobbit—what
is a Hobbit? I suppose Hobbits need some description nowa-
days” (H, 16). When he thinks there is enough information to
follow the recounted events, he abandons description of the
hobbits: “Now you know enough to go on with” (H, 16). Some-
times he deliberately conceals pieces of information in order to
generate interest: “Gandalf! If you had heard only a quarter of
what I have heard about him, and I have only heard very little
of all there is to hear, you would be prepared for any sort of
remarkable tale” (H, 17). On other occasions, he omits data
that the reader already knows: “You are familiar with Thorin’s
style on important occasions, so I will not give you any more of
it, though he went on a good deal longer than this” (H, 203).
The narrator also establishes a direct dialogue with the reader;
because of this, he is sometimes mentioned: “There is little or
no magic about them, except the ordinary everyday sort which
helps them to disappear quietly and quickly when large stupid
folk like you and me come blundering along” (H, 16); or also
in “There was a lot here which Smaug did not understand at all
(though I expect you do, since you know all about Bilbo’s adven-
tures to which he was referring)” (H, 213). He also addresses
the reader with a direct, conversational tone: “As I was saying,
the mother of this Hobbit” (H, 16) or “whether you believe it
or not” (H, 273). Moreover, he is conscious of the fact that his
narration is in a written medium, as the narrator explains, refer-
ring to a song by the dwarves: “Then off they went into another
song as ridiculous as the one I have written in full” (H, 59). On
another occasion, he postpones reporting the adventure: “[H]
e began to wonder what had become of his unfortunate friends.
It was not very long before he discovered; but that belongs to
the next chapter” (H, 166). We can notice the childlike tone of
certain expressions: “(If you want to know what cram is, I can

                                                               79
only say that I don’t know the recipe; but it is biscuitish, keeps
good indefinitely, is supposed to be sustaining, and is certainly
not entertaining, being in fact very uninteresting except as a
chewing exercise. It was made by the Lake-men for long jour-
neys)” (H, 232).
    The Hobbit is a well-established book in the tradition of chil-
dren’s narrative, of which the most notable exponents in British
letters are Lewis Carroll, Kenneth Grahame, Beatrix Potter
and George Macdonald. As Lois R. Kuznets (1981: 150–151)
has shown, Bilbo’s story fits into the rhetorical structure of
children’s fiction, which combines the following features: an
omniscient narrator that comments on events and addresses
the reader directly, characters preadolescent children can easily
identify with, an emphasis on the relationship between time
and narrative development within the framework of a con-
densed narrative time, and a defined geography in which safe
and dangerous spaces are separate. These characteristics are
evident to a greater degree in Bilbo’s story than in Frodo’s. Two
features mark the difference between the tones of these novels.
As far as the relation between time and narrative development
is concerned, the action in The Hobbit covers approximately one
year and emphasizes the changes in season. The characters’
movements in space correspond to the seasonal changes.
    Bilbo fits into the rhetoric of children’s fantasy more than
Frodo does because the former is a character that does not
evolve at all throughout the story, and the events in which he
takes part seem not to affect him. The hobbits and the dwarves,
because of their height, their cheerful personalities and their
habits are creatures with which a young reader can easily
identify. The hobbit houses, holes hidden in the mountain-
side, speak very well to the child’s inclination to hide in small
places. Just like children, hobbits are fond of riddles, puns and
lexical creativity that sometimes transgress grammatical norms.
They are also curious to hear old tales and stories. Their habits
of eating six times a day, of going barefoot, etc. bring them
closer to childlike behaviour. The songs the main characters
sing in The Hobbit are to a large extent cheerful, insubstantial


80
and suitable for the enjoyment of little ones. In general, these
songs intensify the lively tone of the story and show the joyous
personalities of the singers, usually hobbits and dwarves. How-
ever, the aim of the songs and poems inserted in passages of
great dramatic or emotional tension in The Lord of the Rings is
to introduce a peaceful moment and to create an aesthetic dis-
tance. As in the epic poems sung in the Middle Ages, those who
recite the poems and elegiac songs in The Lord of the Rings are
creators of honour. In these works, life and literature merge.

Note
   1. The title of Tolkien’s works will be abbreviated as follows: The
Hobbit (H), The Fellowship of the Ring (I), The Two Towers (II), The
Return of the King (III), and The Silmarillion (S).

Works Cited
Carpenter, H., ed., and C. Tolkien, assistant. 1981. The Letters of J. R.
  R. Tolkien. London: HarperCollins.
Carpenter, H. 1977. The Inklings. C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, Charles
  Williams. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Colomer, T. 1998. La formació del lector literari. Barcelona: Barcanova.
Grotta, D. 1976. The Biography of J. R. R. Tolkien. Philadelphia,
  Pennsylvania: Running Press.
Kuznets, L. R. 1981. “Tolkien and the Rhetoric of Childhood”.
  Tolkien. New Critical Perspectives. Ed. N. D. Isaacs et al. Lexington,
  Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky. 150–162.
Shippey, T. A. 1992. The Road to Middle Earth. London:
  HarperCollins Publishers.
Tolkien, C., ed. 2002. The History of Middle-earth. Thirteen volumes.
  New York: Ballantine Books.
Tolkien, J. R. R. 1969 (1954). The Two Towers. New York: Ballantine
  Books.
       . 1973 (1937). The Hobbit. New York: Ballantine.
       . 1973 (1954). The Return of the King. New York: Ballantine.
       . 1979 (1954). The Fellowship of the Ring. New York: Ballantine.
       . 1979 (1977). The Silmarillion. Ed. C. Tolkien. New York:
  Ballantine.
       . 1997 (1947). “On Fairy Stories”. The Monsters and the Critics
  and Other Essays. Ed. C. Tolkien. London: HarperCollins. 109–161.
West, R. C. 1975. “The Interlace Structure of The Lord of the Rings”.
  A Tolkien Compass. Ed. J. Lobdell. New York: Ballantine. 82–102.


                                                                      81
                         K.S. WHETTER AND R. ANDREW
                        MCDONALD ON SWORD IMAGERY

Many of the important swords in The Hobbit and The Lord of
the Rings are inscribed with runes. As Tolkien himself explains
in The Hobbit, “Runes were old letters originally used for cut-
ting or scratching on wood, stone, or metal, and so were thin
and angular” (note preceding ch. 1). Tolkien says that the use
of runes in Middle-earth at the time of The Hobbit was largely
limited to the dwarves (although Gandalf later leaves a runic
inscription at Weathertop for Strider [I.xi.198–9]); both the
Anglo-Saxons and the Scandinavians, however, made exten-
sive use of them (Page; Elliott), providing a nice link between
Tolkien’s imaginary world and the real world that occupied his
scholarly life.6 When Glamdring, Orcrist, and Sting are first
found in the cave of the trolls in The Hobbit, Gandalf remarks
that “These look like good blades [ . . . ]. They were not made
by any troll, nor by any smith among men in these parts and
days; but when we can read the runes on them, we shall know
more about them” (2.51). The nature of the blades is made
clearer when the party arrives at Rivendell, and Elrond, who
“knew all about runes of every kind,” examines the swords:

     “They are old swords, very old swords of the High Elves
     of the West, my kin. They were made in Gondolin for
     the Goblin-wars. They must have come from a dragon’s
     hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and goblins
     destroyed that city many ages ago. This, Thorin, the
     runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-cleaver in the ancient
     tongue of Gondolin; it was a famous blade. This, Gandalf,
     was Glamdring, Foe-hammer that the king of Gondolin
     once wore. Keep them well!” (3.59)

. . . As swords with runic inscriptions, the Middle-earth blades
may be placed in a rich tradition of medieval sword-lore. Tolk-
ien’s 1936 lecture on Beowulf changed the face of Beowulf schol-
arship, and Beowulf’s battle with Grendel’s dam is dominated

82
by swords.8 The first is Hrunting, loaned to Beowulf by Unferð
and said to be damascened and ring-patterned on its edge
(1459 and 1521).9 The giant-sword taken by Beowulf from the
monsters’ lair beneath the lake is likewise “ring-marked” and
inscribed with a wavy pattern (1564 and 1616), as is Beowulf’s
(un-named) sword at 1489. Although the blade of the giant-
sword melts “just like ice” (1608), Beowulf returns to Heorot
and presents the hilt to Hrothgar:

  Hrothgar spoke—he studied the hilt
  of the old heirloom, where was written the origin
  of ancient strife [ . . . ].
  ...............................
  Also, on the sword-guard of bright gold
  was rightly marked in rune-letters,
  set down and said for whom that sword,
  best of irons, had first been made,
  with scrollery and serpentine patterns. (1687–89, 1694–98)

   Another Anglo-Saxon poem, Solomon and Saturn (identi-
fied by Shippey, Author 24–5 as a source for some of Gollum’s
riddles in the riddle-game in The Hobbit, chapter 5), contains
one of the few identified references in literature to the cut-
ting of runes upon a sword, where it is said of the Devil that
“He writes upon his weapon a great number of deathmarks,
baleful letters; he cuts them on his sword” (qtd. in Davidson,
Sword 151).10 Similarly, in the Saga of the Volsungs (a work
which Tolkien knew well),11 the Valkyrie Brynhild gives Sigurd
knowledge of “victory runes” which are carved in the hilt and
blade of a sword:

  Victory runes shall you know
  If you want to secure wisdom,
  And cut them on the sword hilt,
  On the center ridge of the blade,
  And the parts of the brand,
  And name Tyr twice. (ch. 21, p. 68)

                                                               83
. . . Just as many of the swords of Middle-earth carry runes
and ornamentation, so too can most be considered ancient
heirlooms. Thus, as we have seen, Elrond remarks of Orcrist
and Glamdring that they “are old swords, very old” (3.59). Just
how formidable a reputation Orcrist enjoyed is further revealed
when the sword is discovered in the possession of Thorin by
the Goblins under the Misty Mountains:

     The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he
     looked at it, and all his soldiers gnashed their teeth, clashed
     their shields, and stamped. They knew the sword at once.
     It had killed hundreds of goblins in its time, when the fair
     elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle
     before their walls. They had called it Orcrist, Goblin-
     cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter. They hated it
     and hated worse any one that carried it. (4.70)

   More obvious in this regard, however, is Narsil, the Sword
that was Broken, the shards of which have been passed down
from generation to generation within the kindred of Elendil.
Thus Aragorn proclaims at the Council of Elrond: “For the
Sword that was Broken [ . . . ] has been treasured by his heirs
when all other heirlooms were lost” (II.ii.260; cf. App. A, §I(iii)
323). The sword’s importance is further attested when Aragorn,
forced to leave Anduril outside the gates of Meduseld, threatens
reprisals to any who should touch it (III.vi.115); the passing ref-
erence here to the sword’s being forged by Telchar is part of its
mystique.16 Mention should be made in this context of another
important weapon—not a sword this time—that is handed down
from generation to generation in Middle-earth: the arrow that
Bard uses to slay Smaug (Hobbit 14.236). As Shippey remarks,
the arrow denotes Bard’s heroic heritage as well as some of the
more epic-heroic aspects of The Hobbit (Author 39).

Notes
    6. In this sense we have a variant of Tolkien’s use of philology
to recreate or create a past world or mythology. On Tolkien’s use of
philology see Shippey, Road passim.

84
     8. Unless otherwise stated, all references to Beowulf are by line
number to the Liuzza translation. Quotations in Anglo-Saxon are
from the Klaeber edition.
     9. Although atertanum fah (1459) literally means “[decorated or]
etched with poison-stripes” (as Liuzza translates), it probably reflects
ornamental markings and so could be translated as “adorned with deadly
crawling patternings.” See Wrenn and Bolton, ed., Beowulf n. to 1459,
and Klaeber, ed., Beowulf n. to 1459b–60a. Liuzza’s “ornamented” for
brodenmael (1616) might also be more specific (if less elegant), something
like “damascened” or “woven with a wavy pattern.”
    10. We wonder if there is an echo here of the inscription engraved
by Sauron on the One Ring.
    11. Tolkien had composed a long, unpublished poem in Old Norse
based upon the Edda material dealing with Sigurd and Gunnar: see
Letters pp. 379 and 452.
    16. Telchar’s identity is alluded to but not explained; he seems to
be a sort of primeval master craftsman, not unlike Wayland the Smith
in Germanic myth or Ilmarinen the “everlasting craftsman” who
forged the sky and the mysterious Sampo in the Finnish Kalevala 10:
277–8, 281ff. Elsewhere Telchar is identified as a dwarf smith, but
it seems reasonable to suppose that Tolkien had these archetypes in
mind—the Kalevala is certainly known to have been of considerable
interest to him.




                        ELIZABETH A. WHITTINGHAM ON
                   THE INFLUENCE OF FAMILY ON TOLKIEN

The final, but not least important, of the significant events
and major influences in Tolkien’s life was his family. During
Tolkien’s professional years when his relationships with the
Inklings, Lewis, and other scholars and writers developed,
Tolkien also coexisted in another world, that of his wife and
children. Pearce believes that the attention writers have paid
to Tolkien’s male friends, both those of his youth and those of
his adult life, has overshadowed his family’s importance to him.
In response to Charles Moseley’s assertion that Tolkien was
most affected by his beliefs, his “experience of ” World War I,
and “the nature of Oxford academic life and society” (qtd. in
Pearce 40), Pearce writes, “Without denigrating any of these,

                                                                       85
all of which influenced his work to a greater or lesser degree,
[Tolkien’s] role as storyteller and paterfamilias to his children
was equally important, at least initially” (40). In particular, he
identifies the four Tolkien children—John, Michael, Christo-
pher, and Priscilla—as providing the impetus for their father’s
storytelling: “Indeed, it is fair to assume that if Tolkien had
remained a bachelor and had not been blessed with children
he would never have written either The Hobbit or The Lord of
the Rings. Perhaps he would have written The Silmarillion,
but in all probability it would never have been published” (40).
The role of the family as an influence on Tolkien’s work is an
ongoing theme throughout Pearce’s biography and reflects the
Catholic values that Tolkien held.
   Many of Tolkien’s letters support Pearce’s assertions, espe-
cially as concerns the author’s consideration of his children
as the audience for his writings. In a 1964 letter, he describes
his creation of “stories” to entertain them and explains that
he originally had meant The Hobbit as such a tale (Letters 346).
Earlier, in 1959, he had provided a similar account, com-
menting that he presupposed that “children and fairy-stories”
possessed a unique bond (298). Tolkien often commented on
the fact that he repented of the style in which he had written
The Hobbit. In a 1955 letter to Auden, he apologizes for its
“silliness of manner” and observes that his own offspring had
been too young to put him right concerning his misassumption
(215). Tolkien’s comments support Pearce’s argument that in
the beginning the author’s family, especially his four children,
were his audience and impacted the type of stories he wrote.
   Many authors have written about Tolkien’s relationship
with his wife, Edith, and have speculated about the couple’s
relationship. An early point of contention was Tolkien’s
insistence that Edith become a Roman Catholic soon after
their engagement, and differences in their beliefs seem to
have caused some discord throughout their marriage. Pearce
discusses certain of their arguments in detail and strongly
criticizes John Carey, whose review of Carpenter’s biography
jumps to some unwarranted conclusions (qtd. in Pearce
46). Pearce praises Brian Rosebury’s reasonable response to

86
Carey’s assertion that Tolkien required his wife to confess to
a priest when they engaged in marital relations and that her
vehement resistance to such requests was a source of conten-
tion between them (47). Rosebury points out that Carpenter’s
biography does not corroborate Carey’s assertions, and that
“here it is Carey, not Tolkien, who takes it for granted that
the mere practice of sexual intercourse may be a Catholic’s
motive for confession” (158). Additionally, none of Tolkien’s
writings—and he does discuss sexual intercourse in his let-
ters—supports any such idea. Most of the biographies assert
that Edith was uneasy with certain aspects of Catholicism,
thought her husband spent too much time away from home,
and felt isolated in Oxford and uncomfortable with her hus-
band’s academic friends—Lewis in particular.
   Not surprisingly, the letters that the family shared with
Carpenter for publication reveal—for the most part—little of
consequence about the marriage itself. The facts are that they
lived together for fifty-five years, raised four children, and
took family vacations. Edith followed her husband where he
went, though there are indications that she was unhappy with
the move from Leeds to Oxford, and in retirement Tolkien
followed his wife to Bournemouth, though he returned to
Oxford shortly after her death. The letters indicate that they
nursed each other through various ailments, and the His-
tory of Middle-earth provides evidence that now and then
Edith helped her husband by making fair copies of some of
his manuscripts. Edith, according to her husband, took care of
household matters, and on occasion, they went out to dinner
together and entertained friends and acquaintances in their
home. The bare facts are few and unrevealing.
   No one can know what goes on between a married couple in
the privacy of their home—even children are neither impartial
nor fully informed observers—and long-term relationships
are a complex matter. In one often-quoted letter to Chris-
topher, Tolkien reflects on the sixty-three years the couple
had known one another. The context, however, is important:
Tolkien is writing to his son less than a year after his wife’s
death, informing him of the decision he has made about the

                                                            87
inscription for her tombstone. He prefaces his comments by
noting the improbability of his ever producing an autobiog-
raphy and explaining that he thinks “someone,” apparently
Christopher, ought to be informed about certain facts (Letters
421). Tolkien refers to his and Edith’s difficult “childhoods”
and the pain that they had each gone through, which might
help in understanding some of the tough times they had expe-
rienced, but he avows that their “youthful love” was great and
always strong (421). The portrayal, though including elements
of both light and dark, seems dismal and painful, but is likely
colored by the loss of his life’s companion and by introspec-
tion growing out of his contemplation of his own mortality.
Certainly, these lines to his son emphasize the complexity
inherent within any relationship and the futility of an outsider
attempting to say much that is of significance. Whatever their
relationship, Tolkien often attributed to Edith the role of inspi-
ration for certain images and stories.
    The family member, however, who stands out as making
the most crucial contribution to the author’s work is his son,
Christopher. The youngest of the author’s three sons, Christo-
pher assisted his father in many ways: reading and commenting
on versions of the story, drawing maps, and after his father’s
death, editing and publishing volumes of the author’s manu-
scripts. Though Tolkien and Christopher’s separation because
of World War II was difficult for them, scholars and fans ben-
efited from their being apart during the years that The Lord of
the Rings was being written. Because of their distance and the
lengthy letters from father to son, readers have had a window
into Tolkien’s mind and the creative process involved in his
writing of this important work. That Tolkien valued his son’s
input and help is clear in many letters. Having sent to Christo-
pher the latest two chapters of The Lord of the Rings, the father
asks in one 1944 letter for his son’s feedback, stating, “for a
long time now I have written with you most in mind” (Letters
103). In a letter to publisher Stanley Unwin a few months later,
Tolkien describes his son’s role in more detail, depicting him
as his most important reader, one who checked the text, typed
it, and drew the “maps” (112–13). This description and other

88
similar ones indicate that Tolkien relied on and valued his son’s
feedback and help.
   The letters that Tolkien wrote during World War II to
Christopher and to his second oldest son, Michael, reveal not
only how much they meant to him but also something about
their father–son relationships and about Tolkien’s personal
faith. Not surprisingly, one thought on his mind was that he
might not see his sons again, and he refers to that fear in let-
ters to each of them. Tolkien encourages Michael and reminds
him that they are connected spiritually, upholding their
hope of “heaven” (Letters 55). In one wartime letter, Tolkien
commends Christopher to his “guardian angel” (66), and in
another, writing of their love for one another, declares his
belief in eternity and his confidence that their “special bond”
will survive death (76). He encourages his sons to attend mass
when they can and to sing songs of praise to God when they
cannot. Tolkien writes of his own faith openly and naturally,
suggesting that he has often spoken of spiritual matters to his
sons. To Christopher, he describes a “vision” that came to him
in church that he believed to be the presence of God (Letters
99). Later in the same letter, Tolkien mentions going to mass
with his daughter, Priscilla, on another day, telling about the
sermon, his own response, and his gratification in seeing a
devout “old man” who had also worshipped at St. Gregory’s
(101). He situates such stories between his chronicle of daily
events and the latest chapter of The Lord of the Rings. Conse-
quently, his spiritual life and the practice of his faith seem as
natural and as normal as eating a meal, bicycling to town, or
cleaning the hen house.
   Tolkien’s letters to his children, both during wartime and
throughout their lives, are frank and honest. Though he offers
advice on everything from sex to religion and from dealing
with the oppression of war to surviving college politics, he
also shares his own fears and acknowledges his own failures.
He confesses to Michael that from 1920 to 1930 that he pro-
vided a poor example since he did not attend mass as regularly
as he should have. Describing his inability to escape the faith
of his youth, he expresses his remorse and “regret,” revealing

                                                              89
the “silent appeal of Tabernacle, and . . . starving hunger” that
always draws him back (Letters 340). Because of the strength
and enduring nature of his faith, Tolkien can admit not only
his failures but also his doubts; however, he affirms that his
faith is stronger than passing feelings or temporary lapses. To
his family, Tolkien does not offer pretense but honesty, writing
about his personal beliefs with sincerity and candor. He holds
both his family and his faith as essential elements of his life,
and both clearly affected who he was as a man and an author.




90
       Works by J.R.R. Tolkien
Edited by Tolkien
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, 1925
Ancrene Wissee: The English Text of Ancrene Riwle, 1962
Major Publications
A Middle English Vocabulary, 1922
The Hobbit, or There and Back Again, 1937
Farmer Giles of Ham, 1950
The Fellowship of the Ring, 1954
The Two Towers, 1954
The Return of the King, 1955
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil and Other Verses from the Red
   Book, 1962
Tree and Leaf, 1964
The Tolkien Reader, 1966
The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle, 1967
Smith of Wootton Major, 1967
Posthumous Publications
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo, 1975
The Father Christmas Letters, 1976
The Simarillion, 1977
Pictures by J.R.R. Tolkien, 1979
Unfinished Tales of Numenor and Middle Earth, 1980
Old English Exodus, 1981
Finn and Hengest: The Fragment and the Episode 1982
Mr. Bliss, 1983
The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays. 1983
Beowulf and the Critics, 2002
                                                              91
       Annotated Bibliography
Birzer, Bradley. J.R.R. Tolkien’s Sanctifying Myth: Understanding
  Middle Earth. Wilmington, DE: Isi Books, 2002.
  This in-depth study of the religious themes and symbols in
  Tolkien’s body of work situates the author within the Christian
  humanist tradition.

Bloom, Harold. J.R.R. Tolkien. Modern Critical Views. New
  York: Chelsea House Publishers, 2008.
  This anthology-style volume provides several essays by promi-
  nent Tolkien critics. The essays cover a range of Tolkien’s
  writing and provide a good overview of his critical reception.

Bramlett, Perry C. I Am in Fact a Hobbit: An Introduction to the
  Life and Work of J.R.R. Tolkien. Macon, GA: Mercer Univer-
  sity Press, 2003.
  This general study of Tolkien’s life and writings include his lesser-
  known and unpublished works. Aimed at a general readership,
  this would be a good text for precollege students to consult.

Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston:
 Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
  Generally regarded as the authoritative Tolkien biography, the
  text covers Tolkien’s life from his birth in South Africa to his
  death in England. It deftly combines historical information
  about the author with critical information about his writing.

Crabbe, Katharyn W. J.R.R. Tolkien. New York: Continuum
 Press, 1988.
  A comprehensive study of Tolkien’s life and writing, the crit-
  ical study is organized around the quest motif. Chapter two,
  “The Quest as Fairy Tale: The Hobbit,” provides a genre study
  of the novel.

Croft, Janet Brennan, ed. Tolkien and Shakespeare: Shared
 Themes and Language. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2007.

92
  The essays in this collection explore some of the themes, ideas,
  and character types the two authors shared in exploring the
  influence of Shakespeare on Tolkien’s creative process. It is espe-
  cially useful for exploring the presentation of “faerie” elements
  in each of the writer’s works.

Dickerson, Matthew, and Jonathan Evans. Ents, Elves and
 Eriador: The Environmental Vision of J.R.R. Tolkien. Lexington:
 University of Kentucky Press, 2006.
  A comprehensive and in-depth study of Tolkien’s environ-
  mental vision and the role it played in shaping his mythology
  and writing, this is an indispensable text for anyone exploring
  the role of nature or the environment in Tolkien’s body of
  work.

Duriez, Colin. Tolkien and C.S. Lewis: The Gift of Friendship.
 Mahwah, NJ: Hidden Spring Press, 2003.
  A study of the friendship between Tolkien and Lewis and the
  impact and influence each had on the other’s writing. Chapter
  six deals specifically with the writing of The Hobbit.

Fimi, Dimitra. Tolkien, Race, and Cultural History: From Fairies
  to Hobbits. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
  Fimi uses a historical perspective to examine Tolkien’s writings,
  providing a cultural history of the Victorian and Edwardian
  periods. The author examines discourses of race and masculinity
  in Tolkien’s time, arguing that Tolkien’s ideas developed out of
  his interaction with contemporary thinking.

Flieger, Verlyn. Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World. Kent,
  OH: Kent State University Press, 2002.
  This study applies Owen Barfield’s linguistic theory of the frag-
  mentation of meaning to Tolkien’s body of work. The study
  connects Tolkien’s symbolism, especially light symbolism, to the
  culture and language of Middle-Earth.

      . A Question of Time: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Road to Faerie. Kent,
  OH: Kent State University Press, 1997.

                                                                  93
  Flieger’s access to Tolkien’s manuscripts and unpublished
  writing allowed him to present several new ideas about the
  origin and gestation of Tolkien’s texts and the critical responses
  to them. Flieger uses Tolkien’s presentation of time to help
  construct the author’s mythology and notes how his mythology
  exists in a “troubled and critical” relationship with Tolkien’s his-
  torical period.

Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: The Threshold of Middle
 Earth. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
  Offering an in-depth study of Tolkein and his circle at the time
  of World War I, the text is notable for its detailed study of the
  war experience and record of Tolkien and his college friends,
  connecting Tolkien’s time in the war and a military hospital with
  the beginning of his writing career.

Grotta, Daniel. J.R.R. Tolkien: Architect of Middle Earth. Phila-
 delphia: Running Press, 1992.
  Grotta’s general biography is a good introduction for the gen-
  eral reader to the author’s life and works.

Hume, Kathryn. Fantasy and Mimesis: Responses to Reality in
 Western Literature. New York: Methuen, 1984.
  Hume’s study focuses on the literary motives for an author’s
  departure from conventions of reality. The author also explores
  the techniques writers use to produce such effects, finding Bilbo
  Baggins a “low mimetic hero.”

O’Neil, Timothy. The Individuated Hobbit: Jung, Tolkien, and the
 Arch-Types of Middle Earth. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1979.
  In its Jungian analysis of Tolkien’s fiction, this companion work
  offers an insightful chapter providing analysis of Bilbo.

Petty, Anne. Tolkien in the Land of Heroes. Cold Spring Harbor,
 NY: Cold Spring Press 2003.
  This volume presents a comprehensive study of the themes and
  the internal mythology of Tolkien’s major fiction.


94
Rateliff, John D. The History of the Hobbit: Part One—Mr. Bag-
 gins and The History of the Hobbit: Part Two—Return to Bag-
 End. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2007.
 This multivolume set offers the best textual history of The
 Hobbit to date. The study presents the manuscript of The Hobbit
 with analysis, commentary, and source scholarship. It also pres-
 ents the official revisions Tolkien made to the manuscript, as
 well as an account of Tolkien’s thoughts about possibly rewriting
 the entire book.

Rosebury, Brian. Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon. New York:
 Palgrave MacMillian, 2003.
 A good defense of the critical and artistic merit of Tolkien and
 of Tolkien studies, Rosebury’s volume concludes that The Hobbit
 is “a likeable patchwork of accomplishments, blunders, and tan-
 talizing promises of Middle Earth yet to come.” The author sees
 the novel as flawed by inconsistencies of tone and conception,
 viewing it as a transitional work, a steppingstone in Tolkien’s
 creative journey.

      . Tolkien: A Critical Assessment. New York: St. Martin’s
 Press, 1992.
 Rosebury sought to “arrive at a view of Tolkien which places him
 in the same frame as other twentieth-century writers, explores his
 originality and modernity” (6). The text is accessible and usefully
 organized, a good starting point for a research paper.

Shippey, Tom. The Road to Middle Earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien
  Created a New Mythology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
 Tom Shippey is one of the most respected critics writing about
 Tolkien and his work. Generally considered Shippey’s best work,
 this volume is required reading for any serious critical work on
 Tolkien or his books.

Tolkien Studies: An Annual Scholarly Review, edited by Douglas
  A. Anderson and Michael D.C. Drout. Morgantown: West
  Virginia University Press.


                                                                 95
  This journal presents the growing body of critical commentary
  and scholarship on the entire Tolkien canon.

Walker, Steve. The Power of Tolkien’s Prose: Middle Earth’s Mag-
 ical Style. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2009.
  An in-depth and rewarding study of Tolkien’s prose style, Walk-
  er’s volume employs more of a close reading than a theoretical
  reflection of Tolkien’s style. Although a scholarly text, Walker’s
  study is accessible to the general reader and includes an exten-
  sive bibliography and notes.

Whittingham, Elizabeth. The Evolution of Tolkien’s Mythology: A
 Study of the History of Middle Earth. Jefferson: McFarland and
 Company, 2008.
  A valuable resource, Whittingham uses Christopher Tolkien’s
  12-volume History of Middle Earth to refashion our under-
  standing of Tolkien’s creative process and the growth and evolu-
  tion of Tolkien’s complex mythology.




96
       Contributors
Harold Bloom is Sterling Professor of the Humanities at Yale
University. Educated at Cornell and Yale universities, he is the
author of more than 30 books, including Shelley’s Mythmaking
(1959), Blake’s Apocalypse (1963), Yeats (1970), The Anxiety of
Influence (1973), A Map of Misreading (1975), Kabbalah and
Criticism (1975), Agon: Toward a Theory of Revisionism (1982),
The American Religion (1992), The Western Canon (1994), Omens
of Millennium: The Gnosis of Angels, Dreams, and Resurrection
(1996), Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human (1998), How
to Read and Why (2000), Genius: A Mosaic of One Hundred
Exemplary Creative Minds (2002), Hamlet: Poem Unlimited
(2003), Where Shall Wisdom Be Found? (2004), Jesus and Yahweh:
The Names Divine (2005), and Till I End My Song: A Gathering
of Last Poems (2010). In addition, he is the author of hundreds
of articles, reviews, and editorial introductions. In 1999,
Professor Bloom received the American Academy of Arts and
Letters’ Gold Medal for Criticism. He has also received the
International Prize of Catalonia, the Alfonso Reyes Prize of
Mexico, and the Hans Christian Andersen Bicentennial Prize
of Denmark.

Katharyn W. Crabbe was associate professor of English at
Sonoma State University. She is the author of J.R.R. Tolkien
and Evelyn Waugh.

Brain Rosebury is principal lecturer in English in the
department of the humanities, University of Central
Lancashire in the United Kingdom. He is the author of Tolkien:
A Critical Assessment and Art and Desire: A Study in the Aesthetics
of Fiction.

Humphrey Carpenter is the author of J.R.R. Tolkien: A
Biography, W.H. Auden: A Biography, The Inklings, and coeditor
of The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien.


                                                                97
Perry C. Bramlett is the author of I Am in Fact a Hobbit: An
Introduction to the Life and Work of J.R.R. Tolkien and A C.S.
Lewis Spiritual Reader, coauthor (with Ronald W. Higdon) of
C.S. Lewis: Life at the Center and Touring C.S. Lewis’ Ireland
and England, and a contributor to The C.S. Lewis Readers’
Encyclopedia.

Colin Duriez has published Tolkien and C.S. Lewis: The Gift of
Friendship, Tolkien and the Lord of the Rings: A Guide to Middle-
Earth, and The C.S. Lewis Encyclopedia, and is coauthor (with
David Porter) of The Inklings Handbook.

Tom Shippey is a leading Tolkien scholar and the author of The
Road to Middle-Earth and J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century.

Jaume Alberto Poveda teaches at the University of Valladolid
and has published articles in the Journal of English Studies.

K.S. Whetter is a professor in the department of English at
Acadia University in Nova Scotia. His areas of specialization
include medieval Arthurian tradition and Middle English
romance, genre theory, and epic and heroic literature. His
writing has appeared in such journals as Reading Medieval
Studies, Parergon, Year’s Work in English Studies, and Mythlore.

R. Andrew McDonald has published in Mythlore and appeared
in the Tolkien fan film, Born of Hope.

Elizabeth A. Whittingham is the author of The Evolution of
Tolkien’s Mythology: A Study of Middle Earth.




98
      Acknowledgments
Katharyn W. Crabbe, “The Quest as Fairy Tale: The
Hobbit.” From J. R. R. Tolkien, pp. 28–31. Copyright © 1988
Continuum.

Brian Rosebury, “The Hobbit.” From Tolkien: A Critical Assess-
ment, pp. 100–05. Copyright © 1992 St. Martin’s Press.

Humphrey Carpenter, “Enter Mr Baggins” From J.R.R.
Tolkien: A Biography, pp. 179–86. Copyright © 2000 Houghton
Mifflin.

Perry C. Bramlett, “The Hobbit and Other Works for Chil-
dren.” From I Am in Fact a Hobbit: An Introduction to the Life
and Work of J.R.R. Tolkien, pp. 26–33. Copyright © 2003
Mercer University Press.

Colin Duriez, “Two Journeys There and Back Again: The Pil-
grim’s Regress and The Hobbit (1930–1937).” From Tolkien and
C.S. Lewis: The Gift of Friendship, pp. 88–91. Copyright © 2003
Hidden Spring.

Tom Shippey, “The Bourgeois Burglar.” From The Road to
Middle-Earth, pp. 67–71. Copyright © 2003 Houghton Mifflin.

Jaume Albero Poveda, “Narrative Models in Tolkien’s Stories
of Middle-Earth.” From Journal of English Studies 4 (2003–
2004): 7–22. Copyright © 2004 Journal of English Studies.

K.S. Whetter and R. Andrew McDonald, “‘In the Hilt is
Fame’: Resonances of Medieval Swords and Sword-lore in
J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.” From
Mythlore 25, nos. 1/2 (Fall/Winter 2006): 7–9, 13–14. Copy-
right © 2006 by Mythlore.



                                                            99
Elizabeth A. Whittingham, “Husband, Father, and Storyteller.”
From The Evolution of Tolkien’s Mythology: A Study of the History
of Middle-earth, pp. 30–34. Copyright © 2007 by McFarland &
Company.




Every effort has been made to contact the owners of copy-
righted material and secure copyright permission. Articles
appearing in this volume generally appear much as they did in
their original publication with few or no editorial changes. In
some cases, foreign language text has been removed from the
original essay. Those interested in locating the original source
will find the information cited above.

100
             Index

A                                       as ecological guardian, 27
agency, 24, 43                          original name for, 11
Alice in Wonderland (Carroll), 7        shape shifting by, 26
   comparison to, 62, 66             Beowulf, 9, 76, 82–83
Allen & Unwin, 44, 64–65                heroes and, 77
   illustrations and, 61                stolen cup episode of, 58, 67
   manuscript submitted to, 12,         Tolkien’s lecture on, 82
     60, 66                             translations, 60, 85
anachronism, 77                      Bilbo Baggins (Hobbit), 7, 11, 13
analysis. See summary and analysis      Arkenstone and, 38, 47, 49
Ancrene Wisse, 54                       Gandalf and, 39, 40, 43
Anglo-Saxon, 10, 74, 82, 83, 85         Gollum and, 23–25, 73
antiacquisitive moral, 50               heroic character of, 22, 29–30,
Arkenstone                                 42
   Bard and, 39                         hobbit nature of, 30, 38, 55
   Bilbo and, 35, 38, 47, 49            Humphrey on, 54–63
   Lonely Mountain and, 34, 35          invisible, 24, 31, 33, 40, 72–73
   Thorin and, 13                       knocked unconscious, 41, 72
Auden, W.H., 12, 63, 71, 86             as main protagonist, 13, 17
audience                                pragmatic thinking of, 22, 31
   as children/naive readers,           rescue of dwarves, 31
     44–45, 78, 86                      return journey of, 41–42
   not specifically children, 63        riddle game and, 23
                                        ring and, 12, 22, 25, 31, 38
B                                       stealing cup, 32–33
Babbit (Lewis), 11, 68, 73              treasure and, 39–40, 72
Bag End                              Bill (Hobbit), 16
   Bilbo’s return to, 52             Birmingham, England, 9, 55
   dwarves’ arrival at, 51           Bloom, Harold, 7
   landscape near, 53                Bombur (Hobbit), 13–14, 28
   origin of name, 11, 55            Book of Lost Tales, The, 10
Balin (Hobbit), 13                   Bramlett, Perry C., 63–69
Bard (Hobbit), 14                    Brandybuck, Meriadoc, 75
   in battle with Smaug, 35–36, 59   Bratt, Edith (wife)
   as King Bard, 36                     death, 10, 87–88
   treasure and, 37–38                  marriage, 9
Battle of the Five Armies, 14, 16,      religion and, 86–87
 40–41, 78
Bent, William R., 67                 C
Beorn (Hobbit), 14                   Carpenter, Humphrey, 68, 78
   advice of, 27, 28                   on Bilbo Baggins, 54–63

                                                                     101
Carroll, Lewis, 80                      Elrond, 14
   Alice books of, 7, 66                   examining swords, 82
Catholicism, 86–87                         role of, 20
characterization, 45                    elves
characters, list of, 13–16                 culture of, 19–20
   “evil,” select, 15–16                   king of, 36
   “good,” select, 14–15                “evil” characters, select, 15–16
children’s literature. See also fairy
 tale                                   F
   Hobbit as, 63–69                     fairy tale, 7. See also children’s
Coalbitters, 12                           literature
Country Round, 53                           characteristics of, 48
Crabbe, Katharyn W., 44–48                  quest as, 44–48
Crowley, John                           fate, 23, 24
   Little, Big, 7                       Fellowship of the Ring, The, 71
cup, stealing of                        Frodo (LOTR), 42, 48, 71, 80
   in Beowulf, 58, 67
   in Hobbit, 32–33                     G
                                        Gandalf (Hobbit), 13
D                                          Bilbo and, 39, 40, 43
Dagnall, Susan, 12, 60, 64                 deus ex machina role, 51
Dain of the Iron Hills (Hobbit), 14,       image of, 11
 38, 41–42                                 original name for, 57
Denham, Michael A., 68                     power of, 20–21
Denham Tracts, 68                          saving party, 19
destiny, 23, 43                            treasure and, 39–40
Dori (Hobbit), 52                       Gardner, John
dragon. See Smaug                          Grendel, 77
Duriez, Colin, 69–73                    Gawain, 54
Dvergatal (poem), 76                    Girion, Lord of Dale, 35
dwarves                                 Glamdring, 19, 21, 82, 84
   Bilbo’s betrayal of, 50              goblins, 15–16. See also Great
   list of, 13–14                        Goblin
   name origins for, 69, 76                eagles and, 26
   songs sung by, 79                       wargs and, 25–26, 40
   trapped in mountain, 34–35           Goblin-wars, 20, 82
   treasure lust of, 37                 Gollum (Hobbit), 15
“Dwarves’ Roster” (poem), 76               Bilbo and, 23–25, 73
                                           introduction of, 22
E                                          riddle game and, 12, 23, 83
eagles, 26, 40–41                          ring and, 23–24
Eaton, Anne, 67                         Gondolin, 20
ecological concerns, 26–27              “good” characters, 14–15, 36
Eddic poetry/landscape, 76–77           Gospels, allusion to, 50
Elder Edda, 58, 76                      Grahame, Kenneth, 80

102
  The Wind in the Willows, 7            King Solomon’s Mines (Haggard), 7
Great Goblin, 20–21                     King under the Mountain, 35, 46
  death of, 21, 27, 40                     Dain as, 41–42
  sword and, 84                            legends of, 31
Greeves, Arthur, 64, 70                    Thorin as, 37, 49
Grendel (Gardner), 77                      Thror as, 18
Griffiths, Elaine, 12, 60, 64           Kuznets, Lois R., 80
Grimm, Jacob, 74
                                        L
H                                       Lake-town, 31, 35, 36, 49
Haggard, Rider                          landscape, 53
   King Solomon’s Mines, 7                  as Eddic one, 77
   She, 7                                   topography, 62
Hall, Clark, 60                         language(s). See also sources,
Hardy, James, 68                          origins, and modernizing the
Harry Potter (Rowling), 7, 78–81          past
heroes                                      “accidental homophones,”
   of fairy tales, 48                         67–68
   nature of, 77                            choices/attitudes, 45–46
His Dark Materials (Pullman), 7, 78         of Middle-Earth, 10
Hobbiton, 49, 55                            words into things, 77
hobbit(s)                               Leeds, England, 87
   described by Tolkien, 56             Leeds College, 10
   first inspiration for, 11, 64, 70,   Leverhulme Research Fellowship,
     76                                   62
   nature of, 80–81                     Lewis, C.S.
   self-description as, 55                  friendship with Tolkien, 10, 70
   term origin, 68                          Hobbit manuscript and, 57, 64
Horn Book Magazine, 67                      letter to Greeves, 70
Houghton Mifflin, 63, 66, 67                in literary clubs, 9, 12
Huxley, Julian, 67                          as reviewer, 62, 66–67
                                        Lewis, Sinclair
I                                           Babbit, 11, 68, 73
illustrations. See under manuscript         son of, 67
Inklings, 9, 12, 85                     literary clubs, 12
                                        literary style, 78
J                                       Little, Big (Crowley), 7
“Jack the Giant Killer,” 48             London Observer, 67
journeys, physical/spiritual, 69–73     London Times, 68
Junior Bookshelf, 63                    Lonely Mountain
                                            as dragon’s lair, 18
K                                           dwarves of, 31–32
Kalevala, 85                                goblin army and, 40
Kidnapped (Stevenson), 7                    journey toward, 26
King Edward’s School, 9                     treasure of, 34

                                                                        103
Lord of the Eagles, 14–15             Middle-earth
Lord of the Rings, The                  ages of, 58, 71
   Elrond in, 14                        animals of, 34
   foreshadowing for, 42                kingdoms in, 26
   Gandalf in, 13                       mythology of, 10, 12
   goblins in, 16, 49                   runes of, 82
   Gollum in, 15, 22, 25                sense of history of, 21
   Lord of the Eagles in, 15            swords of, 84
   moral intensity of, 78             Mirkwood
   mythical vision in, 54               campfires in, 28–29
   Necromancer in, 16                   evil, harm and, 26, 27–28, 30
   notes for, 12                        path through, 27, 28
   poems/songs in, 81                   spiders in, 16
   Prologue, 75                       Misty Mountains
   publication of, 10                   catacombs beneath, 21–22
   realistic narrative of, 51           crossing of, 20
   ring in, 22, 72, 73                  goblin army in, 16, 25, 40
   as sequel to Hobbit, 63, 67        moral situation, 49, 50
   son’s feedback on, 88              Morris, William, 70, 76
   swords in, 19                      Moseley, Charles, 85
   timeline and, 71                   mythology
   writing of story, 78                 creation of, 55
luck, 23, 24                            hobbits’ role in, 56
                                        integration of, 78
M                                       landscape and, 58
Macdonald, George, 70, 80               of Middle-earth, 10, 12
  “Curdie” books of, 58                 philology and, 84
manuscript
  illustrations, 12, 61, 63, 65, 71   N
  intent of, 11–12, 58                narrator/narrative stance
  lack of an ending, 12, 60              addressing the child, 78–79
  polishing of, 12                       naive readers and, 46
  review of, 61, 64–65                   narrative models, 78–81
  revisions to, 57                       omniscience of, 78, 80
  submission of, 12, 66                  repudiation of, 44–45, 46
  subtitle, 17–18, 60, 65, 70, 78     Necromancer, the, 16, 27, 42
maps                                  New Statesman, 71
  Bilbo’s love for, 53                New York Herald Tribune, 63, 67
  drawing of, 88                      New York Times, 71
  Mirkwood on, 27                     New York Times Book Review, 67
  Thror’s map, 56, 61–62, 65          Northmoor Road, 57, 60, 62
Master of Dale (Hobbit), 16
material items, central roles, 21     O
McDonald, R. Andrew, 82–85            Old English, 74–76
Middle Ages, 81                       Old Icelandic literature, 12

104
“On Fairy Stories” (essay), 50, 53         One True Ring, 12, 67, 72
One True Ring, 12, 67, 72                  as “precious,” 15, 24
Orcrist, 19, 82, 84                        riddle game and, 23
orcs. See goblins                       Rivendale, 26, 42, 82
Oxford, England, 10, 12, 60, 62,           elves of, 29
 87                                        visit to, 19
Oxford English Dictionary, 66           Rosebury, Brian, 48–54, 86–87

P                                       S
Pearce, Joseph, 85–87                   Saga of King Heidrek, The, 76
philology, 9, 84                        Saga of the Volsungs (poem), 83
physical and spiritual journeys,        Saturday Review of Literature, 67
 69–73                                  Scott, Walter, 76
plot, 44                                Selby, G.E., 63
political situation, 49                 shape shifting, 14, 26
Potter, Beatrix, 80                     She (Haggard), 7
Poveda, Jaume Albero, 78–81             Shippey, Tom, 68, 73–78, 84
prophecies, 43                          Shire, The, 46, 72, 73
protagonist, main, 13, 17               Silmarillion, The, 86
providence, 23                              Middle-earth and, 10
publication                                 mythological cycle and, 58, 71
   centenary printing, 66               Sir Gawain and the Green Knight,
   endpapers, 61–62                       10
   first edition, 10, 12, 62, 63, 65,   Skirnismál (poem), 77
     66, 71                             Smaug (Hobbit), 15
   reprint, 63                              in battle with Bard, 35–36
   second edition, 52, 67                   belly/weak spot of, 33–34, 35
Pullman, Philip                             cup stolen from, 32–33
   His Dark Materials, 7, 78                killing of, 14, 36, 47, 49, 59
                                            original name for, 11, 57
Q                                           secret passageway and, 32, 33
quest as fairy tale, 44–48                  treasure and, 72
                                        Solomon and Saturn (poem), 83
R                                       sources, origins, and modernizing
ravens, the (Hobbit), 15, 37, 38          the past, 73–78
reviews, 62, 66–67                          breaking contact, 76–77
riddle game, 12, 15                         Old Norse/Old English, 74
   fortune in, 23                           pipeweed, 75
   ritual of, 52                            “rabbit” term, 73–74, 76
   runes on sword, 83                   spiders (Hobbit), 16, 47, 51
ring                                        in chapter eight, 27–30
   agency and, 24                       spiritual and physical journeys,
   in LOTR, 72, 73                        69–73
   magic of, 22, 25, 31, 38, 47,        Stevenson, Robert Louis
     72–73                                  Kidnapped, 7

                                                                        105
   Treasure Island, 7                      antiacquisitive moral, 50
Stimson, Catherine, 51                     change vs. security, 17–18, 42–43
Sting, 19, 29, 30, 82                      fate and luck, 24
style, 7, 44–45, 54, 71, 78, 86            maturity, 47
Suffield, John (grandfather), 55       Thorin Oakenshield (Hobbit), 13
Suffield, Mabel (mother), 55               capture by wood elves, 30
summary and analysis, 17–43                death of, 41, 49
   ch. 1: Unexpected Party, 17–18          as leader, 72
   ch. 2: Roast Mutton, 18–19              original name for, 57–58
   ch. 3: Short Rest, 19–20                in possession of Orcrist, 84
   ch. 4: Over Hill and Under Hill,        treasure lust of, 13, 37–38, 39–40
     20–21                             thrush, the (Hobbit), 15, 32, 34, 35,
   ch. 5: Riddles in the Dark, 21–25     37, 38
   ch. 6: Frying Pan to Fire, 25–26    Times, 62, 66
   ch. 7: Queer Lodgings, 26–27        Times Literary Supplement, 62, 66,
   ch. 8: Flies and Spiders, 27–30       71
   ch. 9: Barrels out of Bond, 30–31   Tolkien, Arthur (father), 9
   ch. 10: Warm Welcome, 31–32         Tolkien, Christopher (son), 64
   ch. 11: On the Doorstep, 32             as editor, 10, 88–89
   ch. 12: Inside Information,             on Hobbit origins, 57, 59
     32–34                                 letter to, 87–88
   ch. 13: Not at Home, 34–35          Tolkien, Hilary (brother), 9, 55
   ch. 14: Fire and Water, 35–37       Tolkien, John (son), 57, 64, 71
   ch. 15: Gathering of the Clouds,    Tolkien, J.R.R. See also career;
     37–38                               residences
   ch. 16: Thief in the Night,             biographical sketch, 9–10
     38–39                                 birth, 9
   ch. 17: Clouds Burst, 39–41             career, 10, 22, 62, 64
   ch. 18: Return Journey, 41–42           childhood, 55, 72, 88
   ch. 19: The Last Stage, 42-43,          children, 10, 57, 89
     41–42                                 close-minded people and, 42–43
swords                                     death, 10
   history of, 20                          ecological concerns of, 26–27
   imagery, 82–85                          education, 9
   names of, 19                            family, influence of, 85–90
   symbolism of, 21                        marriage, 9. See also Bratt, Edith
synopsis, 46–47                            religious faith, 89–90
                                           residences, 10, 12, 57, 60, 62, 87
T                                          social skills and, 27
“Tales of Beren and Lúthien            Tolkien, Mabel (mother), 9
  Elfmaiden,” 70                       Tolkien, Michael (son), 57, 60, 64,
Tea Club Bavarian Society                71, 89
  (TCBS), 9                            Tolkien, Priscilla (daughter), 89
Telchar (Hobbit), 84, 85               Tom (Hobbit), 16
themes                                 transitional work, novel as, 48–54

106
translations, 66                      Warwickshire, England, 55
treasure. See also Arkenstone;        West Midlands, 54, 55, 72
  swords                              Whetter, K.S., 82–85
    lust, 13, 35, 37, 38, 39–40       Whittingham, Elizabeth A.,
    sharing of, 42                     85–90
    theft of, 36, 47                  Wilderland, 65, 77
    of trolls, 19                     William (Hobbit), 16
Treasure Island (Stevenson), 7        Wind in the Willows, The
trilogy, 10                            (Grahame), 7
trolls, 16, 19, 47, 51, 82            “Winter Reads,” 60, 64
typescript. See manuscript            wood elf king (Hobbit), 14
                                      wood elves, 29
U                                        dwarves captured by, 30–31
Unwin, Rayner, 61, 64–65              Worcestershire, England, 55
Unwin, Stanley, 12, 61, 63, 64, 88.   World War I, 56, 85
 See also Allen & Unwin                  Battle of the Somme, 9–10
                                      World War II, 88, 89
V                                     writing of story. See also
Völuspá (poem), 76                     manuscript
                                         “asides” to juveniles, 58–59
W                                        “impromptu tales,” 68
wargs, 25–26, 40                         plot/characters, 44




                                                                        107
